Tetra Ramer, you know, every year there are some number of thousands of very bright, you know, people, you know, many of them young, some of them, you know, older and more experienced who come up with ideas for new tech products and new tech companies.
And they, you know, they, and typically a small group of their friends get together and they decide to kind of throw the harpoon and start a, start a company and try to build a product and, you know, and then they, you know, they need, they need some level of, they need some level of money and then they need like some level of basically support, like, like institutional support.
So, you know, they're often, they're often young, less experienced. They often have not been through the journey before they're gonna need to gather a lot of resources along the way.
They're gonna need to hire a lot of people. They're gonna, you know, basically they'll have big opportunities they want to pursue, they'll have problems that will pop up if things even even the great successful companies, you know, from the outside, they look like everything is great on the inside.
They're typically, you know, some form of rolling disaster, there's always something going wrong. So basically they, you know, they, they're sort of at some point looking for partners, who can help them do that. And so venture capital kind of bundles the money, you know, kind of with the help.
And then, you know, a couple of, you know, probably misnomers to it, you know, one is the, you, you would think like the day job is saying yes, you know, to, to new companies, it's actually saying no, you know, we pass on almost everything.
So, you know, the sort of, you know, cynic sort of a black humor joke is, you know, our, our, our day job is crushing entrepreneurs, hopes and dreams, you know, but, you know, that said, you know, the good ones view that as a challenge, right?
And they view us as kind of the initial test to see if they'll be able to clear the bar because if they can clear the bar with us, then they'll have a good chance of being able to clear the bar with future recruits or customers, right? Or, or, you know, other kinds of people, they'll need to, to say yes to them in the future.
And so yeah, we, we sort of present that you sort of provide the initial gait. Another kind of misnomer would be that, you know, te tech kind of has this reputation for, you know, but for being very fast moving. Right.
And so things, you know, technology is developing quickly, but it actually turns out we're one of the sort of slowest investors, venture capital is one of the slowest kinds of, of, sort of investment money in the world. Because to build any kind of grade company is, you know, anything that you're gonna remember that's gonna last, it's a 1020 year project kind of at the minimum.
And so when we invest, we, we invest, assuming we're gonna be in for at least a decade.
And so we're, we're just there, you know, for a very long time every day, you know, helping them work through things. You know, we, we basically, we never press to kind of get our money back. We're always trying to kind of help them build more, you know, more value.
When you're running a venture capital firm, you're basically running a family of funds that run across basically 20 years, right? So you're sort of raising money on a new fund. You've got an older fund that has companies that are three years old. You've got an older fund that's got companies that are eight years old and so forth.
And so you kind of have this, this thing where you're raising money that, you know, it's like planting trees, you're planting trees, you're raising money, on, on things that, you know, won't pay out for a decade. But, you know, if you've been in the business for a while, you have things ultimately that are succeeding from a decade ago and you just kind of keep the process rolling.
Speaker 3
03:02
Do you see the same mistakes that founders make across the board or they're different mistakes all the time?
Speaker 2
03:10
The cliche success.
Well, all, all happy companies are the same, all unhappy companies, have a, have a unique story for sure. There are patterns of the mistakes. There are lots of different mistakes to be made over time, have made them all.
Speaker 1
03:21
What are, what are the obvious ones?
Speaker 2
03:23
I mean, so the, the, the, the, the biggest category by far is internal dissension on the team.
Right. So, so these things are never solo acts. It's, it's always, it's always a team and this will not come as a shock to you. It turns out when you have a team of people, even if they, like, start out getting along really well, even if they, like, consider themselves, you know, kind of, you know, brothers and sisters, like under the pressure of, you know.
Speaker 3
03:41
Of success also of success, particularly in success, you see people come apart.
Speaker 2
03:47
Exactly. Right. So. Right. So if the right money and put it money and fame, like basically reveal the true person, like in, in, in, in a lot of ways, right? And so, you know, yes, there's that people lose their minds also, just like, you know, it's like it's high stress. Right. And so, you know, things go wrong. It's very easy to develop, you know, resentments.
It's very easy, you know, because you're under people, these founders are under so much pressure and so it's very easy to develop resentments of, like, I can't believe you're hogging the limelight, you know, the other ones, like, oh, I can't believe you're not pulling your weight and then they kind of get in this kind of downward spiral.
Same as a rock band. Yeah, exactly. Right. And so it's, it's like most of it, like, sort of my big conclusion is like, it's basically a tech start up, might, might or might not work. And whether it fundamentally, whether it works or not is basically a function of doesn't build something that people want and kind of kind of build a business around.
Speaker 3
04:26
Is it as simple as that if they make something people want, it's probably gonna be ok.
Speaker 2
04:29
Well, if the team holds together. Right. So, so, so, so, so that's, that's the thing. So, so, I know there's an old, venture capital, adage which is, more companies die from suicide than homicide. So, like, if, look, if it's not working, then the team is gonna really be pressing each other hard and, and, you know, that can easily go sideways if it does work, the team can blow up for the reasons we discussed.
And so, yeah, it's, it's basically, you know, and that's what the speech we always kind of give, give, give the founders is like, look, if, if you, if you guys can kind of cohere together and stay, you know, basically as an integrated, you know, team and group and trust each other through the hard times, you know, there's, there's almost always a way through the specific difficult thing of the moment.
You know, there's very few kind of not recoverable mistakes. But you have to really stay together and then, you know, basically what you see with a lot of these companies, it is, you know, at some point, if there's a crack on the team that crack, that magnifies out and ultimately, you know, in, in, in some cases can actually destroy the company.
And, and I would say most of it's that now this is a speech I was just with these two young founders last night who are all fired up for their new, their new A I company. And this is this, they've been sort of asking about the failure cases.
And I was like, yeah, the most likely failure cases, you guys are gonna turn on each other, right? And, you know, of course, they get legitimately, they get the stricken look on their face, right? And then, and then, you know, immediately followed by, well, of course, that's not gonna happen to us and it's like, yeah, but, but also.
Speaker 3
05:40
Half the marriages end in divorce, like, it's the same. Exactly.
Speaker 2
05:43
Exactly. Exactly. It's, it's actually marriage. You know, I think there's an argument to be made. I'm not like a therapy person but, like, I think there's argument should be made that people should think about the partnerships, the way that business partnerships, the way they think about marriages.
I think there's an argument to be made that, you know, marriage counseling, you know, might be helpful, you know, some sort of, let's say intentional process of, of developing trust and communication. You know, that said, look when, when these things get started, it's like a marriage.
They're so euphoric and excited and they feel so tightly bonded that they don't want to ever imagine that that could ever actually happen. And so when it does happen, it usually comes as an enormous shock and, and, and, and that's probably the single biggest company killer is when that happens.
Speaker 3
06:16
Would you say the primary thing people are coming to you for is money or is there more to the picture?
Speaker 2
06:21
Yeah. So I think it's a lot, I think it's more than that. So I just tell you what we always, what we always wanted.
So what we with my partner, Ben and I always wanted when we were starting, we started our own companies for 15 years before we, we started a venture firm to back other people's companies and you know, basically it's just like, look, we, we knew what we wanted to build, like we knew what the product was, we knew what, what vision wise we had it, but it's just all of the mechanics and, and maybe here's a difference, maybe, you know, versus like my, you know, friends, like you working in the entertainment business is, you know, if, if a band comes together, people do a movie, like, maybe they, you know, maybe they do an album, maybe they do a movie, you know, maybe they do a sequel, maybe they don't.
Right. Whereas with tech companies, it's more like for them to work, they really have to compound over, like I said, over like a decade or two decades. And so there, there's no like, well, sometimes they'll do it for two years, they'll sell the company, but that's not the big success case.
Those, those are kind of small scale successes usually like to build something important and valuable. It has to be a decade or two decades. And so they have to really learn how to build an institution and to do that, you know, typically they need a level of, you know, sort of, I would say, knowledge, you know, support expertise, access to resources.
A another metaphor. I use a lot is that building a tech company? It's like a snowball, rolling down a hill. If it's working well, it's, it's growing as it rolls.
So it's sort it's sort of, you know, the way a snowball kind of accrete snow and it gets bigger, a start up, you know, in theory is accreting resources. Right. And so it's kind of pulling people in, you know, it's pulling in more engineers, product designers, right. It's pulling in the right kinds of executives.
It needs to build its team, it's pulling in customers, it's pulling in partnerships, it's pulling in, you know, press attention building a brand. It's sort of, you know, sort of drawing all these resources to itself. And of course, there's, there's a competition among all the different start ups of that same generation to, to get all those resources.
And so they're, they're fighting, they're fighting with the other snowballs as they roll down the hill for all that stuff.
And so it, it just, it, it has over time, it has just turned out that it's like, very helpful to most of those teams if they've got somebody, if they've got something of the form of a venture capital firm, some, some set of people behind them who have done, have done it before and know how to do it, you know, we, we don't run the company like we're not, you know, this is not like private equity.
Like we don't, we don't come in and like, run the show. But, you know, who's their first call basically when something goes wrong or when they need something. Well, you know, a lot of what we do is like, you close candidates, you know, they'll be talking to some engineer, they'll be in a shoot out, you know, with like 
Google
 and then three other start ups to hire an engineer.
And so they'll roll me in and I'll, you know, spend an hour with the person basically, you know, part of it is just like, help them, you know, kind of, kind of, you know, help, help the candidate get over the hump.
But also like, well, one of the tricks you can do when you have like a big venture capital firm, like ours is you can say to 
Canada
, you might be like, well, look, the candidate might be thinking I could go to 
Google
 and I just have like, I'm, I know everybody's gonna think I made a great decision in my career even if it doesn't go, well, I go to 
Google
 on my resume.
If I go to the start up, who's even gonna care what I did if the start up doesn't work, like, you know, I could be stranded if the, if the start up fails.
And so one of the things we get to do is we get to say, look, if it doesn't work, we, we will know you and you'll be a member of our family as well and we will, and we have, you know, hundreds of other companies and we know all the big and we when we will help make sure that your career prospers even in the wake of a failure and we will vouch for you, you know, kind of through that.
And so there's like 100 different versions of that. And so I think that that's most, I mean, that's how we win. We, we don't win on price. We went on, you know, we went basically on being able to be their partner.
Speaker 3
09:19
Did you have experience with V CS from the founder side?
Tell me about, tell me, give me an example. What was that like?
Speaker 2
09:26
Yeah, so I look, I had really good experiences. I had, I had, I had really good experiences. I raised money in 1995. My partner Jim Clark and I at the time raised money in actually 9094 from a firm called Kleiner Perkins, which was at the time, you know, considered kind of the top venture capital firm.
I worked with them for five years. We then Ben and I started a company in 99 we raised money from benchmark, which at the time at the time was one of the top firms.
We worked with them for a long time and then, you know, Ben and I had also been angel investors and so we had invested in, you know what, you know, probably by the time we started the firm, you know, over 100 start ups we were in and we, we were kind of from the side, kind of working with a lot of the founders and a lot of the things we were working with the founders on was navigating the venture landscape, helping them meet the right firms.
And, and then actually helping to kind of, we, we were actually the marriage counselors a lot of the time. So we were kind of helping them kind of unwind when their, when their relationship with their V CS, we get all screwed up. We would kind of help them kind of unwind that.
And so, you know, we just, we, we kind of, you know, we became a so called expert customer and and then at some point, we're like, ok, like this. Yeah, we could probably do this.
Speaker 3
10:22
It seems like a better position to be in coming from that having that experience has to make you better at being on the other side of the, of the table. Yeah.
Speaker 2
10:30
So our argument is very much that our, our argument is we have been you, we have been through everything you've been through. We, we, we have made every mistake that you're going to make. We have figured out ways to get through all those mistakes, right? And, and then we, we deeply understand you, we understand what you're trying to do and you know, we, we're gonna, we're gonna sympathize with you along the way.
There is a counter argument to that. But I, I think about a lot. And it's the argument that V CS who have not started companies use against us. And basically, the argument goes that if you're a former operator founder, like we are, you, you will tend to get emotionally entangled with the, with the companies and you'll become not objective and not clinical.
And at some point when you're investing money and, and even when you're actually advising companies, at some point, you need to get clinical, like, you know, there, there are certain moments in time where you need to like actually recognize the truth and tell the truth both to yourselves and to the companies, right?
And to and to everybody else. And so the argument goes that basically, you, you might, you might be, you might be a better founder, you might actually be a worse investor as, as, as a result of the inability to get to get clinical. You know, we, we try to offset that by, you know, kind of being very conscious of that and trying to, you know, kind of retain our critical faculties.
You know, we, we do like internal portfolio reviews every quarter. And so we kind of, you know, it's kind of force ourselves to like, basically tell the truth about everything, you know, look, having said that, you know, if the failure cases, you know, we get emotionally entangled with, with somebody working hard to realize their dream over a decade, you know, fair enough.
You know, I think it's, I think, I think it's much better to err on that side. And, and, and get the pay off of that, which is like we're really there, like we're, we're really deeply there. Like we don't quit, we don't walk away. You know, we, you know, we, we care tremendous. We, we have all of the added motivation that comes from caring tremendously.
Speaker 3
12:00
Pick an example of a story of a company that you've either invested in or been part of a success story and walk me through all of the stages of what happens the ups and downs along the way.
A case study.
Speaker 2
12:17
Yeah, I'm gonna use, I'm gonna use code, I'm gonna use code code names for the companies. I don't want to speak for the individual companies. And so, I mean, look, II I have a company right now.
I'm gonna call this company s and you know, it, it was the easy one, like it was two founders who had started a previous company together, their previous company went through a lot of ups and downs that actually hit the financial crisis really hard in 2008 and almost blew up and they had to make all these changes.
And then they ended up selling it to a to a big company. And then they basically were like, all right, we wanna, we wanna we wanna, you know, do, do, do the new thing and, and they just like, it was, I don't know, it's like watching, you know, 
Babe Ruth
 or something, you know, point to the place in the, in the outfield where he's gonna hit the home run and they just, like, hit the ground running.
You know, they've had issues along the way, but it's mostly been this, like, incredibly smooth, you know, it's just like this well oiled machine, you know, they've, they've just, they've, they've just hit like a, a huge, you know, kind of revenue milestone.
They're not, you know, increasingly, you know, important in their, in their industry, you know, every once in a while you get one that goes that well, one what happens is just like, you know, in the beginning, everything is a dream.
It's a clean sheet of paper, you know, it's this incredible moment of sort of what do they call it? It's like a liminal moment where you can basically design your dream.
And your dream is the product you've always wanted to build and your dream is the, the company you've always wanted to have and you kind of think, think of those in parallel and you bring in all the smart people, you know, and it just like, it just seems like everything's gonna be great, you kind of expect it's gonna be hard.
But like you, you, you, you're all fired up and then basically what happens is this reality just like punches you in the face over and over and over again. And, you know, generally that takes the mode, the, the mode of basically people telling you no. Right. And so V CS tell, you know, they won't fund you.
Employees tell you no, they won't join your company. You know, customers tell, you know, they won't buy your product and kind of all the way through and then, you know, disaster strikes every month or two in one form or another.
We talk a lot about the emotional treadmill. It just sort of the, the, the founder sort of psychology, sort of, my, my famous line on that was, it sort of, it is alternates between euphoria and terror and then, it turns out that lack of sleep enhances both of those.
Right. And so it's the four in the morning.
Ok. Well, there's another thing which is, is related to this, which is the, the, the, the founders have to put on a brave face, like, so that they, they have to always basically act like everything's going great because otherwise it'll shake confidence. Right. And they'll, they'll lose team members and they won't be able to raise money or whatever. So they always kind of have to act like it's going really well.
And in fact, going to like a party with like a lot of founders is really funny watching them because everybody's, you know, every, everybody's asking each other, well, how's it going? And everybody's got this, like, very forced grin on their face and they're like, oh, everything's going great and like, everybody's just dying inside. Right? But like, nobody can say that.
Right. And so I always think about like, it's the four in the morning kind of thing where you're staring at the ceiling, right? And, you know, yesterday, it felt like you had the tiger by the tail and today it feels like it's all gonna fall apart and just like, oh my God. Right.
And then, and then the other thing I, I find is like, that doesn't really ever moderate. Like if you talk to a lot of people who are still, you know, founders running their companies 10 or 20 years later, you know, a lot of their life is every morning they open up their email inbox and it's just like a descent to hell.
Right. It's just like one person after another with an issue and it complains and a problem and I quit and fuck you and like, just like on and on and on and they got like, you know, get up in the morning and like, put on the, you know, put, put on the hoodie head in there and like, just like, confront all these things head on.
You know, some of them love to do that and battle their way through every step. I know some of them, check out some of them just get a few years and do it and they're like, I just hate living in, you know, this way. I, I'm, you know, I'm, I'm becoming, you know, I'm, I'm becoming unhealthy.
You know, people develop, you know, people develop alcohol problems, drug problems, all these things. What's probably striking about this is like, wow, this sounds like it's like, mostly psychological. Right. And it's like, yeah, it's, I think it's mostly psychological pressure.
Speaker 3
15:41
It's, it's a tremendous amount of stress. That's right. Yeah. How small is the world of V CS and founders, like, altogether? Is it hundreds of people, do you know everybody? Is it thousands of people? Is it hundreds of thousands?
Speaker 2
15:56
Yeah. So I say the following. So one is, it doesn't really ever stabilize and so many other industries and I think music was probably like this for a long time. I don't know if it still is.
But, you know, at some point in a lot of, a lot of businesses, basically things stabilize and you just have like a certain number of record labels or a certain number of movie studios and, you know, at some point and then every once in a while it was like small changes, it, what, in evolution they call it pated equilibrium, right?
And so things are kind of cruising along and then every once in a while there's like a disruptive moment. Right. So somebody, somebody develops hip hop or something and like everything changes. But like, you can kind of count those right over time, right? And those are like specific moments people write books about and they're really big deals, right?
Or every once in a while, like a movie studio will go under. But like, it's actually very rare, like, you know, 
Warner Brothers
 is still in business, you know, 100 years later, tech never stabilizes like that. Like it, it, it always kind of looks like it's stabilized.
And then basically there's some earthquake in the form of basically disruptive technology change and then basically everything gets kind of tossed up in the air and kind of redone and, and, and, and these platforms shifts happen, like, actually quite regularly.
It's like every five years. And so, you know, it's like for computers, it was mainframe to P CS to, to, to mobile, right? And then for, you know, internet, you know, it was one point no internet and then internet and then cloud and then social now there's this A I thing, right?
And so every time you have one of these kind of earthquakes, it sort of, it sort of recalibrate everything. You know, it's like the meteor, the meteor strike hits and the dinosaurs die and, you know, the bird and the birds take off kind of thing.
So, you know, because that's sort of a more common thing in our world. There's just more of this pattern of and then the, the new thing is often led by people who were not important in the previous wave, right? Because it's, it's a lot of its kids, a lot of his kids who kind of grew up with whatever the new thing is and they just have a different take on, on how the world should look.
I was an example of that. And so, yeah, so there's like, basically there's actually a lot of turnover.
Like the, you know, there are venture firms that are 50 years old, but, you know, they're on generation five or six of partners and, and a lot of their peers from when they were younger, you know, no longer exist. And, and so whether they're in the same firm anymore is like an open question. You know, the company is gonna last for a long time.
Generally at some point, the company basically become, you know, at some point it was Elvis leaves the building, like at some point, the sort of innovation spark leaves the company, right? Like when the founders basically, you know, at some point, push out or retire, like at some point, even the most innovative company just kind of becomes a big normal boring company.
So it's still in business. It's like, you know, I would say it's a little bit like a neutron bomb. It's these things or something.
It's like the building is still there, there's still people, the parking lot is still full of cars, it still has customers, but like, it hasn't invented a new product in a decade. Right. And so like, what, you know, what even is that? And by the way, it has like 100 times the number of employees it had when it used to develop products all the time.
And so like what, you know, what's happened there. And so th th those companies kind of, they, you know, they're still important from a business standpoint, but they're no longer vital, they don't do the new things and that's when the new start ups show up.
So, so anyway, so back to your question is like, yeah, it's basically, you know, sort of continuous turnover of people. Everybody is highly aware that a 22 year old can show up at any moment and upend the entire thing and that has happened repeatedly. So people are kind of very open to that possibility.
It's still jarring when it happens because, you know, it's like number one, the changes seem so weird in the beginning and then number two, like 22 year olds seem really young.
So, you know, it, it's still the last one of those. It's hard to process that. I mean, we're going through right now with a, I like it's, it's the, you know, that's the big one right now. You know, this one is not so much 22 year olds, this one's more people who have been toiling at research labs for, you know, decades without really anything to show for it and their stuff just started to work.
And so you actually have a lot of like, scientists who never thought they would be in business who all of a sudden are like, basically top entrepreneurs and, you know, kind of, they're, they're kind of emerging, blanking out of basement labs, you know, the real world kind of, you know, trying to build companies, you know, so that's happening.
But like, you know, the, I mean, the classic recent one, you know, social networking, you know, Mark Zuckerberg shows up. He's 22 you know, we, we, we had a we had a party actually when I, I was, I, I'm on his board and we had a party when he finally became old enough to rent a car, right?
It would be a big deal on, on business trips, right?
You know, as the CEO of this incredible new company. So, yeah, there's a lot of turnover. I would say it's a and then I say, look, the other thing is, and this, this is the uncomfortable part of the topic I think is it's an elite, it's an elite occupation. Like it, it really is.
It's still a small pool, even though the characters are changing, it's a small pool, it's a small pool and, and, and every once in a while you get somebody who just comes completely out of left field who went to some college you've never heard of and came from some random country and doesn't have kind of, and they just, like, show up and they're just really amazing.
But that was you. That was me. That was me. Yes, there's not a lot. But, you know, I would say that, you know, the, the, the more standard pattern is there's a small number of universities, you know, 
Stanford
, MIT Berkeley, a few others.
There's a small number of kind of important companies in any point in time where young people are getting trained by, you know, by working there and kind of gaining the skills, you know, there's kind of, there's, it's actually like music there, there are scenes, right?
There's like, you know, there's social scenes, you know, there's, there's these, you know, kind of, you know, loops of people who all know each other, you know, are kind of coming up, like whenever I read like interviews with like either comedians and musicians, it always turns out it was, you know, they, they were with all of the other people of their cohort at that time.
And what they all kind of had in common is nobody was taking, nobody was taking any of them seriously, right.
And so that, that, that same thing happens, there's also a small number of geographic locations, 
San Francisco Bay
 area, you know, just ends up being the center of the world for a lot of this. Why is that? So 
San Francisco
, and, and when I say 
San Francisco
, there's 
San Francisco
 is the city which has its own idiosyncrasies. And then there's just the Bay Area generally.
So a lot of it is just office parks. Well, so, so practically it's where 
Stanford
 and Berkeley are. And it's where 
Facebook
 and 
Google
 and you know, all these other companies are. And so it just kind of is already ground zero. And so there's a natural kind of continuation thing that takes place.
And then there's also a long history to it, which is the 
Silicon Valley
 really started in like the 19 twenties, 19 thirties, even with technologies before the computer.
So it's, it's, it's running on like 100 years of what you might call a network effect where basically meaning the next really bright person who's technical, technologically oriented is more likely to come to the place where all the others, more people are than to go anywhere else. And so there's like a positive feedback loop that kind of just keeps spinning.
And then quite honestly, I think there's just something really, I mean, but 
California
 has its problems and they are profound, but there's something magical about 
California
. There has been something magical magical about 
California
 that predates the entertainment industry that predates you know, the tech industry.
And it's basically that 
California
 is the frontier and the same mentality that led to the original settlement, you know, 
California
 was the, the last, you know, sort of the furthest thing to the 
West
 that was settled.
You know, it was sort of, you know, it was ungoverned for a long time that the, you have the gold, you know, the gold rush, the wild, wild 
West
 like, and, and then, and then what happened was there was this just like selection process where if you were, you know, if you were oriented around status and respect, you wanted to succeed on the east coast in New York and Boston.
And if you wanted to go carve your own path and create something new, you went to, you went, you know, you went, you went basically as far away from the east coast as you could get and that, you know, and that's basically right.
Right. Right. Where we sit right now, it, like you could call it like, creative, you know, people experiment, right, like they blaze new trails in like every way, including, like how you live your life. You know, 
California
 is famously the home of, you know, thousands of cults, you know, have been developed here.
I think it's actually no accident that 
California
 is sort of a, we call it sort of the stack. You know, 
California
 builds the technology of, of dreams. And then we, we also, you know, the Hollywood and the entertainment business, you know, actually makes the dreams, right?
And so it's like this sort of integrated dream factory, you know, is, is it ever really quite real, you know, 
Los Angeles
 is like famously a fake city, right? It was just like a desert.
And then they just basically it was the, the most of cities when it first got started and they, they ran newspaper ads in east coast cities with like drawings of like palm trees, like, you know, this lush paradise. And then people would buy pal of land and they come out here and it was just desert and then they famously had to go get the water from the central 
Valley
 and that led to iron palm trees.
Yeah, but it turns out and it turns out the palm trees are imports like it, right? It turns out palm tree. This is, this is actually one of my big breakthrough moments in understanding 
California
, which is the palm trees are not native.
Like it's just like this made up, you know, basically, they're the most iconic kind of thing for 
California
. Basically, it's just like it was like a made up import. And so there's a, you know, there, there, there's like an artificial, very American idea though. Yeah.
Oh, very much. Yeah. Yeah. Well, so and, and well, I mean, here we said in Shangri LA, right? Like pa paradise, right? You know, and, and you know what the weather like the weather like, you know, if, if you have a choice. Right.
Fundamentally, you know, where you can live, you know, wouldn't it be nice to live someplace where it's like, 70 sunny every day? Like, it, wouldn't that be awesome? You know, it's the thing, the Bay Area and 
L A
 kind of have in common, which is kind of the spirit of adventure. You know, the original movie industry, people came out here for two reasons.
One is they were fleeing Edison's patent enforcers, he had patents on movie, movie, recording equipment, projectors. And so he would send in the picker tens to like break your, break up your studio if you weren't paying him his patent fees.
So they came 3000 miles away to get out of the orbit of, you know, Eastern Power. And then they also came here for the weather because they could film year round. And so, and that, and that spirit, you know, that spirit exists and, and it's actually an exciting time for that because for a long time, the sort of north and south, you know, 
California
 were sort of pretty starkly divided.
And you didn't have a lot of crossover. I mean, you know, a lot of your predecessors in, in music just never had any, your technology is a threat if they even thought about it at all and had very little interest in what was happening and, and quite frankly, vice versa.
And there's just a lot more crossover it turns out the 
Valley
 is more creative than we thought. It turns out 
L A.
 Actually, there's some people down here who are actually quite interested in tech and have done a lot have done a lot in tech.
And so we we, we the there's real magic magic happening but having said that 
California
 also has all the downsides and, and, and 
Silicon Valley
 also has all the downsides of the place where basically people are making up dreams from scratch.
You know, there's, there's, there are dystopian elements to it, right? Like, yeah, 
San Francisco
, a real city has always got an interesting question because like, you know, they no longer arrest criminals.
Speaker 3
24:59
How's it working, right?
Speaker 2
25:01
Like you might just get like stabbed and killed, walking down the street. But a friend of mine got a job working for actually open 
A I
 and he, he he moved to be close to the office and he got, he got an apartment a block away and they're, they're in the mission in 
San Francisco
, which is sort of famously the, the home, the hub of 
A I
, but also just like incredibly violent and basically laws aren't enforced.
And he said, oh, I love living near the office. He's like, I wake up in the morning, I go to the stairs. So I'm a block away from the office. The key is I run at full speed as fast as I can from my apartment to the office and then at night I run as fast as I can because I'm trying to not get, like, basically stabbed or killed on the way, on the way in.
And so it's got both of those, you know, the, the, the drug thing, you know, has always been, you know, a big deal. You know, hallucinogens are like a big thing, you know, up north and, you know, it's, it's, it's the good and the bad.
They're, they're opening people's consciousness and horizons and, you know, there's a cultural creativity, flowering thing that's happening just like it happened in the sixties and seventies. But there's also the downside, which is, you see people whose lives are, you know, getting wrecked by drugs. And so it's also got that side of it.
And so it, it's got this like very organic, it's just like this perpetual cycle of cultural creation, people designing their lives and then people, you know, building these, these, these products and these, you know, experiences that people all over the world kind of, you know, consider to be the best that there that there are. So it's a, it's a special place.
Speaker 4
26:22
Lmng element electrolytes.
Have you ever felt dehydrated after an intense workout or a long day in the sun?
Do you want to maximize your endurance and feel your best add element electrolytes to your daily routine, perform better and sleep deeper, improve your cognitive function.
Experience an increase in steady energy with fewer headaches and fewer muscle cramps.
Element electrolytes, drink it in the sauna refreshing flavors include grapefruit, citrus watermelon and for a limited time chocolate medley which you can enjoy hot formulated with the perfect balance of sodium potassium and magnesium to keep you hydrated and energized throughout the day.
These minerals help conduct the electricity that powers your nervous system so you can perform at your very best element. Electrolytes are sugar free keto friendly and great tasting minerals are the stuff of life.
So visit drink lmnt.com/tetra and stay salty with element electrolytes. LMN.
Speaker 3
27:43
T it felt like in the early days of the 
Valley
. And when I say the early days, I mean, seven years ago, the idea of move fast break things. Disruptor Awards were really good things and you know, the 
Apple
 had to think different campaign and something seems to have changed.
Speaker 2
28:10
What let me ask you.
Speaker 1
28:11
What do you think has changed?
Speaker 3
28:12
I don't know, I don't understand it because it seemed like the whole tech revolution was about.
You could finally be yourself. You could learn what you want on the internet. You didn't have to get what was fed to you.
You know, I remember at one point in time, 
Twitter
 was called the Free Speech Wing of the Free Speech Party.
So what changed?
What changed?
Speaker 2
28:36
So let me start with, I actually think that I actually think a lot of that is still there.
And, you know, it's not there as much in the, in like the big companies, but like, there, there is still an anarchic spirit in the start ups. And so we meet with people every day who basically are just like, yeah, screw it. Like I'm just gonna, like, I'm gonna break a lot of glass. Right. I'm gonna just do something, you know, brand new and isn't that.
Speaker 3
28:52
Necessary to make new things? I believe so.
Speaker 1
28:55
Yes, I think it seems like I believe it is.
Speaker 2
28:57
Let me say I'm very much in favor of it and we could talk about why, why that is. But yeah, it's obvious that that's how you do new things. Like you have to look like the past will crush you, right? If, if you let it. But most cultures throughout time and most cultures in the world today, they're just their thoughts are dominated by the past, right?
And there's a good to that, right? Which is they have cultural, they have continuity, right? They venerate their ancestors, they, you know, I mean, literally like the natural form of human society is like literally ancestor worship, right?
Like you just like, and, and look, there's a lot to that because like your ancestors like learned a lot and they, you know, try to pass it on to you through these kind of cultural transmission things. You know, started with like epic poetry and then made its way through to, you know, kind of all the, you know, books and stories that we have today about people in the past.
But, like, you know, most cultures are just, like, completely dominated by the past and they just don't do new things and anybody who tries to do new things, there's this thing called a tall Poppy syndrome. You know, the tall poppy gets chopped off. Right.
And there's tall poppy syndrome in the West, there's tall, tall Poppy syndrome in the east. You know, it's like this very natural kind of tribal tribal thing. And so, you know, anybody who's really gonna do something new is gonna like upset the 
Apple
 Cart and it's gonna make people upset.
And then I would say technology is maybe even the most kind of advanced version of that or the most dramatic version, right? Which is like, you know, a transgressive piece of content, like a transgressive song or movie can really make people mad by suggesting that there's a better, you know, a different way to live and that obviously can have a big effect.
But tech does something I think even more than that, which is when tech, when, when something disruptive in tech changes, it doesn't just change tech, it also changes the sort of order of status and hierarchy of people, right? Oh, well, this is sort of the thing. So why, why does, why does the media hate tech so much?
And like, there's a lot of you know, potential explanations for that. And, and one of them is just like, we cut the legs out from under the media business, right. Like we, like, basically obliterated, you know, like for newspapers we like, obliterated, you know, basically most of their advertising revenue because most of that, you know, that people used to advertise the newspapers now they just advertise online.
And so there's like a big reordering, you know, to, well, actually in music that happened, right. You know, Napster file sharing, you know, cut the lights off from under the economic structure of the music industry that caused a massive turnover in who was running the music companies.
And now there's a new generation of people who have figured out streaming and digital distribution and, and so like there's been a complete reordering of status, you know, that, that, that's come from that. So I think that's a lot of that.
Yes. Look, I think you have to do that. I, I think there's a couple things, a couple other, just broader things that have happened. You know, this one, I'll kind of pin on us, which is just like that because the dog has caught the bus, like a lot of us have been in attack for a long time.
It was always like, wow, what we're doing is actually really valuable and important. People don't understand it and we have to tell them how valuable and important it is. And now it's like, oh they actually get it and now they're mad. Right.
Like, right, we won. Right. The dog has got the bus, like, we, everybody gets it now everybody gets, the tech is powerful and important and now they're really upset about it. Right. And so, so some of that now they want to control it and now they want to control it. Exactly. And, and so the dog has got the bus, you know, it turns out the bus has its own opinions on where things should go.
You know, the dog is gonna get dragged behind the bus. And so there, there, there is some of that, look, the, the other thing that's happened that you, you know, well, but the other thing that's happened is just, you know, look, the world I think really changed in 2016 and like, why and how, and you know, how much of it was one guy and how much of it's a global phenomenon.
You know, we sit here, you know, said he just hated sitting here today. A very Trump, like, figure just won in the 
Netherlands
. You know, in this kind of huge surprise, a Trump like figure just wanted 
Argentina
, which is this kind of huge surprise.
But, you know, the the world like the world is I experienced it in 
the United States
 in 
the Silicon Valley
. Like it really changed in 2016. And a lot of people really got psychologically, you know, altered, shattered. Broken, reformed kind of through that. And I, and I, I bring it up just because like tech got pulled into that shift, just like everything else has gotten pulled into that shift.
And, and, and that's why I tell our, our founders a lot of the time we try to grapple with this stuff is just like, look like we are, what we're doing is valuable and important. But we, we are not, we're not the boss, we are the dog, like society writ large has energy and momentum of its own and we are wrapped up in it just like everybody else.
And so, you know, we, we are changing it in some ways, but also we, we are part of it and we're, we're getting, we're getting kind of dragged along with whatever the prevailing trends are. And so tech has become politicized. And I would say socially energized in a way that it never had been.
I don't know, maybe, maybe this is a big difference between, you know, this and, and, and L A which is maybe in like music and, and movies, you could say that like music and movies have always been intertwined with like politics, you know, probably going back forever, but for sure, going back to like the sixties, right, kind of very deeply intertwined and, you know, music, music, music may have actually caused sort of political and social change in the sixties and seventies and eighties but it was also reacting to it.
Right. And it's like a feedback loop. And I, and I think in tech for a long time, we didn't, we didn't have that. We were building like tools, you know, we were building like fun tools that people can play with and use.
But they, you know, when, when they would get engaged in politics or whatever, they would put down our stuff and then they would go out in the street or, you know, go on TV, or do whatever they would do. And now tech is integral to how society works.
Speaker 3
33:28
But even beyond tech, there was a time when big companies were focused on making the best product they could and having the best bottom line they could and that was all they were focused on.
They were focused on the business that they were running and it seems like somewhere along the way, the idea changed where now corporations whose obligation to their shareholders is to do what I just said now, feel like they have some moral imperative.
How did that happen?
Speaker 2
33:60
Yeah. So, you know, look, I should start by saying for people who haven't really thought about this hard.
You know, there, there is a, you didn't do this but there's a misnomer that people apply to companies, which is, they'll say like there, there's usually criticism, they say companies are only focused on their shareholders and they're only focused on making money and they're legal and those people sometimes say they're legally required to, like, optimize profits no matter what. Right.
And, and so, and this is why they say those companies are sort of gonna be sort of intrinsically, you know, morally, you know, neutral or even evil because, like, if it makes sense to pollute or if it makes sense to, like, have horrible policies or whatever, to build products that deliberately break so that people have to buy, you know, the new, the new thing next year, like they're gonna do all these evil things because they're optimized for profits.
It actually turns out there's actually no legal requirement for companies to purely optimize for profit. In fact, quite the opposite. You're supposed to optimize for kind of a long term value and you get to, your management has like broad latitude to be able to kind of decide whether to engage in social issues, whether to like have different kinds of policies inside the company.
You know, you, you're, you're perfectly protected legally as an executive of a company. If you trade off short term profits for some, you know, longer term, you know, just a brand value. Like we're just not even though the doing this thing would call, you know, we, we were thinking of starting a new whaling division. We were gonna kill a bunch of whales and sell their meat, then we could make money doing that.
We're gonna decide not to do that because it would impair our brand. Like as a corporate executive, you're completely legal, legally covered. Nobody will ever will ever question that. And so, so corporate executives have always had a fair amount of latitude in terms of how they, how they, how they want to steer their, their, their companies.
Look for a long time, you know, one is just like, look, business people were just, you know, focused on business. But, but the other thing that happened was the, the, the received wisdom that you got when you were trained up in corporate 
America
, I would say between the seventies and the around 2016 and the way I was trained up was you actually don't want to get involved in political and social issues because of the backlash.
Like you're gonna make people mad, right? You're, you're getting, you're gonna, you're gonna summon the demon of you become involved in politics or social change. So politics and social change are become involved in you. And so you're sort of inviting a level of backlash that very well might destroy you.
Speaker 3
35:52
That was something Michael Jordan famously said early on when they were asked, they asked him about politics.
He said, I want everyone to buy my sneakers. That was his answer about what his political affiliations were.
Speaker 2
36:04
And you know, is that a capitalist statement in part? But is that also a social and political and moral statement? Which is, look, I don't want to be a divisive figure, right? I, I don't wanna have some kids love me and other kids hate me. Right?
Because I'm on the wrong side of some divide, right? And so, yeah, so to your point, like I think that was, that was very common. Look, I think there's this, I don't know, this, this vortex opened up and, you know, a a very large number of executives got felt very guilty about some set of social and political things.
There was tremendous peer pressure that developed, you know, to be able to, you know, to stand up on things. Employee bases change, the millennials in particular showed up in the workforce with a lot more, you know, sort of demands on their employers.
I mean, even my like socially activated, like older, you know, friends, you know, who in business, like even they are shocked that the young employees show up kind of so fired up and so demanding that the, the companies, you know, take, take all these different positions.
And so that that happened and then, you know, look, I think some people think they can differentiate, you know, I think some people, I saw some companies have deliberately decided that they'd rather have half the Market hate, love them and half the Market hate them than have nobody care.
And so I think maybe that's, you know, and you know, just, you might say hypothetically at 
Nike
, for example, actually might be quite happy if liberals buy twice as many shoes and conservatives don't buy these shoes and, you know, maybe that, that works.
And then quite honestly I think people are drunk, I think they're drunk on sanctimony and, and they're drunk on politics and they're drunk on feeling powerful and they're drunk on, you know, grandstanding.
And I think it's like a chemical, you know, it's like a chemical thing. It's, it's a drug and it's very easy to get hooked on that drug. It feels great. Right? And then, you know, people on your side are like, praising you and talking about how wonderful you are and, and you, you even say it also probably to some extent it feels good to be hated, right?
Because it's like, wow, I'm really important. All these people hate me. They're all mad at me. Like I'm in the mix, like, right, I'm in the fight, like I'm really making a difference. Like, people are unbelievable. And so I, I think a lot of it is just like, I think a lot of it is just this emotional thing.
It's like a, it's like a heroin, you know, kind of thing. And I think there's a hangover from it, I think actually, you know, a bunch of companies have that hangover right now. A bunch of companies have been damaged very badly by this. And they have, you know, severe internal problems. I mean, look, there, there are big companies where the CEO no longer runs the company, like the company is run by the mob, right?
I mean, and just the, the employee base can just like, freak out and like, threaten to protest or threaten to quit and like the CEO just rolls over every single time. And so like, you know, at some point, like, what is that? Right?
Is that a, you know, is that a company or is that like a social movement, you know, wearing, wearing the skin suit of a of oo of a company? So, you know, I say optimistically, you might say this was a moment of time phenomenon and that, you know, mean reversion will kick in. And then you might also say, you know, no, look like we just live in a different world. Now we live in a different kind of culture.
We have a different kind of media, you know, this is never going back. And I, I think it's related, it's very much related to the question of like, do politicians quote unquote become normal again or do they actually become kind of stranger and stranger? More and more unusual? I think probably things just get weirder.
Speaker 3
38:51
I think so too. I, I think it'd be hard to go back because if you see now when you look at the politics of the old days, it was a very lawyerly, it felt less connected to the people, it felt like a, a different elite class and now it feels more like whether it's a OC or 
MTG
, it feels like the people.
Speaker 2
39:14
Well, and by the way, just the fact you can name them, right? Like the fact you can name them, the fact that they, those two, like, I already have like iconic, you know, three letter, you know, names, right? It's like they're right up there now with mlk. Like, how, how did that happen? Right?
The fact that they, like, if you poll, if you did like 
UN
 surveys, like they would pop up, you know, those are pro you know, those, those two people might be, you know, other than, other than Trump, like, and, and Biden, those might be the top respective, you know, 
Democrat
 
Republican
 today for 
UN
 Awareness or, you know, that if you talk institutionalist in 
DC
, they, they're very frustrated by this because they view it as like, ok, the people who are purely focused on media presence are getting all the, you know, they're getting, they're, they're basically getting lined up to be a future presidential nominees.
Whereas the people focused on substance are, nobody knows who they are. And it's kind of like, ok, maybe that's just the world, right? And maybe if you're gonna be a politician that's the world you have to live in and you have to be willing to, you have to, you have to have a strategy on that.
And maybe if you're in business, this is just the world you live in and you have to, you know, be, you know, just that, I don't know, pick on people. But, you know, look, 
Disney
.
Disney
 went through a version of this with their, you know, with, with Bob Chick who, who I, who I know and like, you know, where, you know, he tried very hard to keep them out of poli, you know, first thing he did when he came in was I said, you know, we're, we're staying out of politics, we want everybody to buy the sneakers and like, the company just was not having it.
And Bob Iger has come back and he very much doesn't have that view. He's, you know, he's, he's keeping them in all these things and, you know, who had the right strategy? I don't know.
And, you know, but it's, it's gonna tilt one way or the other. And so I think there's a lot to that. I, I also think, look, I think that I, I'm not a big fan. I think there's a lot of simplistic kind of accusations that like social media is ruining everything or the internet is ruining everything.
And I don't like, I think those are generally kind of simplistic and sort of incorrect things. But, you know, look, there is no question that media forms society. So, you know, society forms, media, media forms society, you know, mcluhan, you know, wrote extensively and, and work that pulls up incredibly well about, you know, the role the media takes in shaping culture.
And look, we we live in a different media landscape now. And, and again, we're the dog that caught the bus, like we made it, we invented all this stuff. But like, you know, you might say like a critique I might apply to my own, my own thinking on this is like, what did you think would happen when you connected everybody together into like a single global media sphere?
Right? Mcluhan used the term the global village and, and what people forget about the term the global village is he wasn't saying that was good.
What he was saying is basically the entire globe was gonna globe is gonna revert to the behaviors of a village and the behaviors of a village are very different than the behaviors of a city, behaviors of a villa, you know, of a city are like cosmopolitan and open minded and like embracing of new ideas and so forth. The the the values of a village are like very narrow minded and moralistic and sharp.
And they, you know that villages like ostracized people, you know, for slight differences in belief and everybody's watching everybody all the time and everybody's super critical, right? And so, you know, we actually invented the global village. Everybody's acting like a Villager now, you know mcluhan would say, yeah, no kidding. Like, you know, great job guys, the the.
Speaker 3
41:47
Great benefit of the villages in the past was that you'd go to another village and they'd have their whole own way of doing it.
That's right.
Speaker 2
41:55
And if it's a global village, right, the biodiversity of villages is gone.
Speaker 3
41:58
Yeah, it just gets all turns into.
Speaker 2
42:00
The same, the same thing. And so I look, I think we've been, I think this is a big problem. I mean, this, this, this would be my interpretation of the drunk, drunk on politics thing, which is just like we became drunk on being sort of dom domineering members of a global village.
They thought they, they became, you know, both, yeah, both company CEO S but also a lot of activists, you know, became sort of convinced that they were in a position to kind of steer the totality of human civilization, society, you know, through, by using these technologies.
You know, look, I think there's some truth to that. So like we've all gotten basically wrapped up in a collective, you know, single collective psycho drama, but look like I, I also don't think like 8 billion people want to be wrapped up in a single collective like psycho drama.
And I mean, if anything, there's just like at some point, adrenal fatigue, like it just at some point it's just tiring to be like on to the next, like, howling outrage, right? Like, like how many of these, how many of these can you actually go through?
It's actually even funny sitting here today is like, there's still people trying to push like the same buttons they were pushing in 2020 they'll attack companies or whatever. And, and in 2020 you know, some accusation will be leveled on something race or whatever related to, you know, in 2020 it would have led to a huge crisis.
And today, you know, people are pushing the button and like, just nothing's happening And it's just because like, people, you know, it's just like the 80th time that you're going through a race panic, the boy who cried wolf, the boy who cried wolf and, and it's becoming so clear that so much of that is like astroturf and is cynical manipulation, ploys and like using emotional guilt, you know, to try to manipulate people to do what you want and people trying to like, you know, make money by selling their, you know, newsletter or whatever it is where they're, you know, talking about evil.
Everybody at some point, it's just like, all right, I got the message, ok, I guess we're all evil, you know, I don't know, like, I'm tired of feeling bad all the time. And then by the way, at some point, you get the actual full on backlash, right?
Because the the other thing the internet does is it's the opposite of a global village. It also makes outlying ideas much more accessible. And so if you've had it with a prevailing view on something on the internet is the best medium you've ever had to be able to go basically find the other side.
And so you, you find like, I think there is, it's like there's a, there's a power Law curve like this thing where there's like a small number of like global village, like dominant ideologies that basically suck people in and sort of mass numbers.
But then there's also this long tail thing where there's also like 1000 you know, there's 1000 like entrepreneurial efforts to have new kinds of cultures, new kinds of art forms, new kinds of creativity and, and those have already existed.
But they've always been fragmented and scattered and it's always been hard to like find your little micro, you know, kind of tribe of the things that are interested in what you're interested in, especially if you don't live in the same, you know, in the same place.
And the internet now makes it possible to find, you know, the alternate view of basically anything. And it makes it easy to find the other people who like that alternate view.
Speaker 3
44:23
And so you have like same with products like Etsy, you know, it's fun to go to Etsy instead of 
Amazon
, it's just a different experience, right?
Speaker 2
44:29
And, and by the way, you can pick and choose, right? As a consumer, that's a great example, you can pick and choose where you can, you know, you can buy 80% of your stuff on 
Amazon
 because it's a, you know, it's a garbage bin. I just don't care that much versus like your water bottle, you know, like you want something hand crafted, right? And so the, the, the choice side of it is there and is really being blown out.
And I just, yeah, iii, I continue to have a lot of faith in people and I think people don't want to. I I don't think people want to live in a vortex of just uniformity and you know, sort of mutual shaming forever. I think that at some point people want to do different and new things. And I think that the internet also makes that possible.
Speaker 5
45:05
Welcome to the House Of Macadamias.
Macadamias are a delicious superfood, sustainably sourced directly from farmers macadamias, a rare source of Omega seven linked to collagen regeneration, enhanced weight management and better fat metabolism.
Macadamias are healthy and brain boosting fats.
Macadamias, paleo friendly keto and plant based macadamias.
No wheat, no dairy, no gluten, no GMO S no preservatives, no palm oil, no added sugar.
House Of Macadamias.
I roasted with 
Namibian
 sea salt, cracked black pepper and chocolate dipped snack bars. Come in chocolate, coconut, white, chocolate and blueberry white chocolate.
Visit House Of Macadamias.com/tetra.
Speaker 3
46:24
Do you think that big tech companies are too big to fail?
So could something come and replace 
Google
 for search?
Speaker 2
46:33
Well, so this is the, so let me let me start with the, the goal of every company is to become too big to fail. The goal of every company is to become a monopoly.
The goal of every company at some point is to get the government to give them monopoly status and protect them. And so there's this this, this term the regulatory capture. So big companies hire all these lobbyists.
And at some point, what they're trying to do basically is they're trying to write laws and then get their own people into key positions and regulatory agencies so that the government basically becomes their over, you know, basically their, their overseer and they.
Speaker 3
46:59
Prevent people from growing to compete.
Speaker 2
47:03
Yes, to prevent people like us from backing founders like we back who are gonna develop the disruptive thing that's gonna ultimately hollow, hollow them out. And so, and by the way, it's, it's, this is a cycle like all of our companies grew up and they want to do that too. Right. So this is a cycle, right. So in this one, we're both the dog and the bus. Right. Right.
Venture capital funded 
Google
. 
Google
 is now trying to do what I just described, they have this active effort under way to try to get government regulatory protection. And then we have, we are back in the next generation of companies that are trying to basically screw that up.
I mean, look, go 
Google
, this is very public right now, 
Google
's going through exactly the, the process you just described right now with, with search which is does, does A I make search irrelevant? Right? Like, but does it make any sense to go search and click on links? If you just have an A and you know, she G BT, they can just give you the answers. And that's a, that's a very big product question for 
Google
.
And then there's also a very big revenue question in there, which is 99% of 
Google
's revenue comes from ads. The ads are these keyword ads on search results, you know, does, does that happen in, you know, if, if the user is not clicking on links, are they clicking on ads? And so will, you know, will there be, will there be ads in A I or, or even if there are ads in A I will, will be those ads work the same way.
Speaker 3
48:04
You, what's your prediction like? How do you see that playing out?
Speaker 2
48:07
Yeah, look. So, so, and I would say 
Google
 if it was in this interesting position where number one, they invented a lot of these A I technologies, right? And so the key breakthrough for Chet GP T actually happened at 
Google
 in 2017 in classic the company form, they sat on it. They didn't, they didn't use it.
If you talk to people in 
Google
, they will tell you that 
Google
 could have had GP T chat, GP T for the way you have it today, they could have had it in 2019. Had they say, have they been focused on it? But they, they decided not to do it. So there's this, this is like a, a classic big company thing.
Now, now they've, they've woken up now. They, they feel threatened. They, they understand everything I just said. And so they've got this internal effort called 
Gemini
 and they're gonna try to lead 
Prague
 to GP T and they Sergey brand, one of the founders has come back to work on that.
But how will it.
Speaker 3
48:43
Work for the ad model?
Speaker 2
48:45
That is, that is an open question. That is a very open question. I would, I would give two assumptions. My assumption is number one, yes, there will be a transition from search and 10 blue links with ads. There will be a transition from that to just ask a question, get an answer.
And I think that transition is underway right now. I think 
Google
's gonna, they're already starting to launch their own version of that. So like when you do go 
Google
 searches now and a lot of those searches at the beginning, they'll actually just try to give you the answer.
They're trying to lean into that. So that look on the, on the ad side, the argument for the argument for ads and A I is actually quite similar for the argument for ads and search which is basically like, if you're searching, like, I don't know if you're searching, where should I go on vacation?
Right. And it's like, well, you know, how about this beach? You know, in 
Thailand
 it's like, ok, well, the very natural next thing to do would be I'm gonna click and buy a ticket. And I'm gonna click and buy a hotel reservation. Right?
And so presumably people are going to be, you know, talking to the A I about things that they ultimately want to buy and then there will be an opportunity in there to actually be helpful to actually have an ad that actually makes it possible to do. The thing that you're, you're talking about.
Speaker 3
49:37
Seems like if you're going to something for information, if they have an interest in selling you a particular thing that undermines their ability to give you the best information.
Speaker 2
49:50
So the, the, the history on here is that the search ads was actually not invested by 
Google
. It was actually invented by a different company in the nineties, this guy Bill Gross actually down here in 
L A
. And I call, I think it was called Go to.com at the time.
And they were the first company that rolled out a search, a search engine where there were ads, but, you know, there were sort of ads in between the links and, and it was actually viewed out of the gate as like unethical for that reason and it was like, oh, this is bad because it biases, biases the results and, and by the way, there's, you know, look, there's, there's some truth to what you're saying.
Like, there's, now there's a commercial incentive.
Speaker 3
50:19
I mean, I can't imagine a version where it's not 100% true.
Speaker 2
50:23
Well, but here's why it's not 100% true because there's utility value to it. Right.
Speaker 3
50:27
Like, if you don't know, you don't, if, if you're because of bias, we don't know that.
Speaker 2
50:33
Yeah, but at some point you want to buy something, right?
Speaker 3
50:35
Like, yeah, but how do you know what to buy if the thing that you're trusting to give you the information is trying to sell you? One of many that's a problem.
Speaker 2
50:44
Well, so here's the other thing that happens and you might view this as making the situation better or worse. I, if they don't sell these ads on fixed price basis, they're auctions, ads are priced on auctions. And so the ad that you actually see is the guy who's willing to pay the most to, to, to present ad.
Speaker 3
50:55
So it's not based on the best service.
Speaker 2
50:58
It's not based on the best service, but it's also not just the lowest common denominator thing either. It's the person who can justify paying the most for the ad. And it turns out there are a lot of product categories where the guy who can pay the most for the ad has the best product.
Speaker 3
51:08
That's a real stretch, that feels like a real stretch.
Speaker 2
51:10
Mercedes spends a lot more money on that form of advertising marketing. It does to the who says that's the best product than Toyota does? Because, but generally speaking in the world, the argument goes, the better the product, the more expensive the product, the more the company is gonna spend on advertising it. Do you believe that? I think there's, I think there is a point to it.
Speaker 3
51:27
Generally speaking, not. Can you argue it? Do you believe that?
Speaker 2
51:30
Well, look, a lot of times when I'm looking ok, I'll give you something a lot of times when I'm looking for something and I'm just like, I just wanna, like, buy something and I don't want to spend the next week trying to, like, research it and navigate it, trying to crack for all the biases and I just, like, need the thing.
It's like a pretty good proxy. It's like, ok, if they're willing to spend, you know, $40 to get this thing in front of me. Click. Right. I wonder about that because the guy, because if they weren't, because the key is self interest, like if they weren't making money with the $40 then they wouldn't be spending the $40.
Like they spent the $40 even before they knew whether I was gonna buy it. And so it, it's costing the advertiser real money to run the ad. And so there's some proxy there where they have a healthy, there's some means they may be the best funded. It may be. Yes. So there are moments, there are times, there are times when the categories get over funded, but like, but there are, there are most businesses over.
This is where self-interest kicks in and helps you, which is most businesses need to make money over time to do that. They need to calibrate how much money they spend on marketing versus everything else.
And if they can, over time, if they can afford to spend money on marketing, they probably have a pretty good product because a lot of people are probably buying it. Right. And if they don't, they don't. And so. Right. So, so the, the look on your face is the look that everybody had in the nineties when this idea first rolled out. And it was exactly this argument, it turned out, it worked like it.
Speaker 3
52:35
Well, it, it worked in that people have gone along with it. They have, people have given up the search for the good thing in exchange for the convenience of somebody wants to sell me this and they're telling me what to buy.
Speaker 2
52:50
Well, yeah, you can see here would be a question. Are people more or less likely to buy the better version of the product out of all the choices today than they were before the internet?
Depends on the person. Yeah. Ok. But like a lot of people, I was a part of this, there's also just a, a fading, a memory thing that I think that happens, which is through the internet. It was actually really hard to get any information on products. That's true. Right. Like, and so, like, you know, God help you, like, try to find, like, you know, well, this is a big issue in the car industry for a long time.
It's like, you know, some cars were just like more, much more fundamentally prone to break down that other car. But it was actually really hard to figure that out. And it was hard to aggregate. It was hard to either have an authoritative voice that would tell you or it was hard to actually have an environment where people could tell each other.
Right. So a lot of consumer reports, we used to do it. They built, they built a big business, they built a big business because of that. Right. And there was a certain, as I'm sure you remember this, there was a certain kind of consumer who was glued to consumer reports and used it as the Bible for everything they bought.
But there were a lot of people who didn't because there's a lot of people who just have other things going on in their lives. And so, you know, I think on balance, the internet has made it so the better products have done better relative to worse products. I mean, there's just, there's basic examples which is, remember when you used to mail order, you used to mail order things, wait 4 to 6 weeks for delivery.
Speaker 3
53:55
I had no idea what you were going to get.
Speaker 2
53:56
Right. Yeah, exactly. And there was some drawing and some catalog somewhere and whether it was even the products. Right. And so, you know, today, like, everything's overnight, like, there's like, reviews and ratings and like, again, is it perfect? Like are there like fake reviews?
Speaker 3
54:08
It's definitely better and you can order several different options and you can see one that works for you and everyone understands because it's mail order things get sent back. I definitely prefer it. Now, that's a different question though than the the corruption built into the system.
Speaker 2
54:26
There's some disconnect. Oh, look, having said that 
Google
 again, I'll defend 
Google
's honor was 11 more step, which is I 
Google
 doesn't care. 
Google
 is running at auction. They, they're, they're optimizing on price of, of what the person is willing to pay to put the ad in front of you.
So they're, they're not to my knowledge, they're not putting their thumb on the scale like they're not basically saying we're gonna like 
Amazon
 is well. So this, this 
Amazon
. So 
Amazon
 is in an interesting spot. Are 
Amazon
 ads surfacing the high quality products.
Speaker 3
54:49
No, not, not even the ads, 
Amazon
 if you're looking for whatever. Often the first recommended choice from 
Amazon
 is the one that 
Amazon
 makes.
Speaker 2
54:60
And that's also true. Yes. Exactly. And the FDA there's a government investigation now where, you know, the 
FTC
 is trying to basically force them to stop doing that. Is that true? Yeah, for that reason, I don't know whether what will happen with that case, but they're trying to.
So, so, yeah, look like, but I take all of your points. You know, I think well, well made you know, look, this is all gonna get rethought in the A I world, right? So, you know, look should the A I have a view, you know, should the A I have opinions of product quality the way it has opinions on everything else.
Well, so Ian, this is also happening in social media, right? So Elon has this thing now com Community Notes, right? For, for X where it, you know, has this thing and.
Speaker 1
55:30
It's what is, what is it, how does it work? Ok.
Speaker 2
55:32
So it's this very clever thing. So all these social media companies, these social media companies all used to be free speech, you know, free, free, free speech wing of the Free Speech Party. And then it just turned out like a lot of people said a lot of things that made people mad.
And so these, these companies all created what they call trust and safety groups. And of course, that is like a Super Orwellian terms, it means you can't trust them at all and they're totally unsafe.
But, right, and so what you ended up with in the trust and safety groups was just basically, you know, some well meaning people, and then you had a lot of people who were in there to basically put their thumb on the scale and this really kicked in on politics where, you know, they would have just obviously different, you know, standards for, you know, candidates from different political parties that everybody could kind of see in plain sight.
And so that, that, that, that model never worked very well. And so the the, the people at 
Twitter
 and I think this actually started before Elon got there, but he, but he embraced it when he got there. They came up with this new idea called Community Notes.
The idea of Community Notes is that anybody that there's, there's people, there are people who have the button to be able to submit a community note, which then there's a way that you kind of apply and you become one of those people.
It's like being a Wikipedia editor or something like that, right? And so there are certain people who can propose Community Notes, but a community note does not get approved and used unless people who have a history of disagreeing, agree on it.
So for example, I we we, we, we see a statement, somebody says something and it's just like, you know, it's wrong. You and I are two community note editors. We have a history of political disagreements. We have a history of conflict where we really don't see eye to eye on things. But then this time we see eye to eye, right? And then that's the one that's the note that gets posted, right?
And so I would say it's been working shockingly well, like, like it's not, and by the way, it's not perfect because it still goes wrong and you people try to trick the system, but it's by far the best system that I've seen that actually works. So he's done this very clever thing, interesting thing where you can now do Community Notes on ads on ads on ads.
Interesting. So if somebody runs an ad that makes false claims, right, or exaggerate something it can get community noted. And so the platform itself is like, oh, actually the claim in that ad is actually not correct. Here is the actual truth and here are the links for the truth. And, you know, you can even, you can imagine the reaction of the advertisers, I mean, right.
You know, they're just like absolutely furious every time this happens. But it's, but he's running this experiment basically saying is the faith and trust of the user base, you know, being improved by the fact that the community knows can actually be legitimately fact or the the ads can be fact checked is the value of that greater than the lost value of the advertisers who get alien.
And by the way, he would say that the advertisers who get alienated by that are probably the worst advertisers anyway, because there, there's some issue, it's surfacing if you're making a product and if people have a problem with it, if you're the maker of it, you wanna know that if you're good. Right. If you're honest. Absolutely.
Speaker 3
58:02
Absolutely. Yeah, if you want to improve your product to always be the best thing to be, of course, you would want.
Speaker 2
58:07
To know that. And if you don't, maybe you should not be advertising. Exactly. Right. Maybe you should not be allowed to advertise. And so II, I think that's a very clever experiment. And I, I think, and I think there's a lot more of this kind of thing. There's, there's a lot more experiments like this people can, can run.
I think in the next 20 or 30 years, we'll figure out actually a lot, you know, this is all around trying to make the global village work better. Like this is how to get basically 8 billion people to kind of share a mindspace and not want to kill each other. And you know, this, this, this, this is the kind of technique that I think you can start to figure out.
Speaker 6
58:36
So much of today's life happens on the web.
Squarespace
 is your home base for building your dream presence in an online world.
Designing a website is easy using one of 
Squarespace
 best in class templates with the built in style kit. You can change fonts, imagery margins and menus. So your design will be perfectly tailored to your needs.
Discover unbreakable creativity with fluid engine, a highly intuitive drag and drop editor, no coding or technical experience is required understand your site's performance with in depth website analytics tools.
Squarespace
 has everything you need to succeed online, create a blog, monetize a newsletter, make a marketing portfolio, launch an online store.
The 
Squarespace
 app helps you run your business from anywhere, track inventory and connect with customers while you're on the go.
Whether you're just starting out or already managing a successful brand, 
Squarespace
 makes it easy to create and customize a beautiful website.
Visit Squarespace.com/tetra and get started today.
Speaker 3
01:00:04
Can a company grow too fast? Oh, yeah, for sure. Tell me about it.
Speaker 2
01:00:08
Yeah. Very common. Very common.
Yeah. Well, so especially when, when either the revenue just starts to pour in or when they raise too much money and, and the, the basic mechanic is very straightforward, which is just you know, if you have a problem, if the answer is you can always hire somebody to fix the problem, then that's what you'll always do because it's the easiest thing to do, right?
It just, I'll just go hire another engineer. They'll just go do that.
The, the problem is it's just like it, it's like any human organization, like organizations behave very differently when they're large versus when they're small. And there are, you know, big issues involved in running large organizations that are, you know, very complicated and it's very easy to run them badly.
And it's very easy that I use the metaphor of Elvis leaving the building. Like it's very easy for Elvis to leave the building company grows too fast. The good people, quit the bad people, stay.
We have another thing we call the Law of crappy people, which is in any organization. So organizations have levels, you know, so there's like levels of, you know, promotion levels, you know, level one through eight or whatever.
And there's always an internal process to try to figure out how, you know, when people should get promoted. And so the Law of crappy, crappy people says that the quality of any level in the company will degrade to the worst person at that level, right?
And it's, it's a very natural human thing, which is just like, well, I wanna get promoted to level three. And like, I know I'm better than, you know, that other guy who just got promoted, right?
And so whoever is the worst person at that level now sets the bar and so basically, as companies grow, basically, performance tends to collapse, you know, kind of level by level, you know, meetings, you know, communication overhead and overwhelms everything.
People are just sitting in meetings all day. Yeah. Or, or a, another thing that happens is you, you hire too many people from another culture. So you think you have your unique culture and then you hire 300 people from 
Google
 and you discover all of a sudden that you're 
Google
, you know, all over again, but without their business just with all their problems.
Yeah. And so that's, I would say that's, this is, this is part of the, more companies die of, indigestion than starvation, right?
Because starvation is no fun. But starvation is highly motivating, right? If you don't have any money and you only have a few people, you have to be smart if you are flush with cash or you can, you can try to spend your way out of all your problems. You know? And, and you, you could say there's a metaphor here for individual lives, right? Which is like a lot of people get in a lot of trouble. Yeah.
Speaker 3
01:02:11
I think that's why I was asking about if people mainly came to you for money because it seems like money is not at the highest level of what it takes to make great things. It's a piece of the puzzle, but it's not the main piece of the puzzle. I don't think it hasn't been in my experience. I say it has been.
Speaker 2
01:02:28
That's right. And, yeah, and I think that, we, we find ourselves in and people don't believe this. We find ourselves in practice often trying to get our companies to not raise as much money as they can, you know, kind of down down the road.
Yeah. Look, we just tell them, like, look, it's just bloat, like, just simply bloat. Like, you know, look, you, you know how to run this company of 50 people. Everybody feels great. You just need to, like, close your eyes and imagine that like that's not how your day is going, your day is going, organizing, you know, meetings on calendars and cross.
Speaker 3
01:02:51
And if you can grow the company with the 50 why would you hire more?
Speaker 2
01:02:55
Yeah. Yeah. Now usually you do. So, so there are some companies, there are a small number of companies that become big and important with very small numbers of people and there are these kind of very magical successes, you mean example. So the great one was 
Minecraft
. So 
Minecraft
 at the time that it sold was I think three people total.
Which was a marketable, I don't know, 2 billion and a half 2 billion or something. And it, but it was this giant global phenomenon and, you know, now it's, you know, it's done by 
Microsoft
 and now there's a lot more than three people working on it. But it's, you know, it's, it's, it's an amazing, it's an amazing thing. I mean, look, Bitcoin was like one guy.
You know, it's worth like, what, $800 billion today or something. Like, so there was that, you know 
WhatsApp
, when they sold it to 
Facebook
, it was 50 people, 
Instagram
 when they sold it to 
Facebook
 was, I think 11 people. So you have these, yeah, you, you have these kind of very, kind of special things.
Mao is one guy plus basically a bunch of contractors, this, this, you know, huge kind of force now in art A I, so you have these kind of very special things. It's just they do at some point like this is the, this is the pressure on the other side.
Like at some point, there are things that are just kind of obvious that these things should do that they just don't do understood like 
Minecraft
 was like a great, you know, kind of viral phenomenon, but it really should be what 
Microsoft
's turning into today.
It should be like the entire world and there should be, it should be like you should be able to use it for like education and it should, it should run all these different platforms and it should have all these different, you know, has all this new content and, you know, it should be this thing that people can be in for 20 years and, and so, you know, it's much like deeper and richer and more built out than it was, you know, same thing.
What's, what's that, what is, what's happening at 
meta
 right now is 
WhatsApp
, 
WhatsApp
 is, you know, very widely used.
It's one of the main ways that small businesses communicate with their customers, but there's no capability, there's been historically, no capability inside 
WhatsApp
 for a small business to be able to like maintain a customer database or whatever inside 
WhatsApp
, which is like a very obvious thing like for a restaurant or something.
And so, you know, there are things like that that makes sense to add that are actually valuable to the users that just require more people. So yeah, there, there's, there's pressure on the other side to grow.
It's, it's just there, there's some, yeah, there's some theoretically optimal rate of growth of, of, of heads and it's very easy to, it's, yeah, it's one of those things where nobody ever quite gets it. Right.
Well, and then look, the other thing that happens is the, the economic cycle. Like you, you know, these companies all tend to over hire during an economic boom, you know, and then there at some point there's a crash and there's a rationalization and you kind of wish you always wish you didn't have to go through that because it, it's bad to do layoffs.
But it's very hard to just keep that. It's very hard to over time have a sustainable model where you don't make mistakes.
Speaker 3
01:05:13
How did you meet your partner, Ben?
Speaker 2
01:05:15
Yeah. So I met Ben and we were actually trying to staff up at our, my first company 
Netscape
 in 1994. Yeah, we were desperately, we, we had the tiger by the tail was that the internet was gonna take off and we knew it. So we had to kind of get, get in position. And so we were trying to hire in good people.
And he was one of the first people who came in from an existing successful software company to join us. And, you know, he's a young guy, Jim was called a product manager. So somebody who kind of orchestrates, orchestrates things.
And then very quickly, it just became clear that he was one of the sort of sharpest young, you know, people we had and so we promoted him, you know, very rapidly over the course of the next few years. And I, I ended up working very closely with him and I always thought had we stayed, we, we sold our company in 98 1998 4 years in, but just an eternity that was, it turned out, it was only four years.
I, I, if we had stayed independent, I think he would have ended up being the CEO, he was on track to do that. So I spent a lot of time with him and we got to know each other really well. And then so it just, it sort of became obvious after we sold our company, I wanted to start a company. And so it became obvious he would be the right person to do it with.
Speaker 3
01:06:11
Is it as much a friendship as it is a partnership?
Speaker 2
01:06:14
There's an old thing around founding teams in and just generally, which is what it, it's a, a friendship from a business relationship works better than a, a business relationship from our friendship.
Like when two people who are personal friends go into business together, it often destroys the friendship. Whereas people who have a business relationship first and really learn to trust each other in business can become very good friends. And so for us, it's been that latter, it was business first and then it's become, you know, become a very deep friendship.
Yeah. And we, you know, we, we talk all the time and we, we get along great and we, we, you know, we're, we're, we're always, you know, teasing each other and it's all, it's all good having said that it's now almost 30 years.
And so, there also is a, old married couple, you know, kind of, kind of aspect to it, right? And some of that is, you know, we can finish you each other's senses and, you know, some of that as we get on each other's nerves.
So we, we still argue all the time.
Speaker 3
01:06:60
That would be something you would argue about.
Speaker 2
01:07:02
Just constant, constant arguments. I mean, about basically everything. Well, it's it's a big, it's a, it's a, you know, it's obviously a big benefit of a partnership is you have somebody you can actually talk to who you trust, who can actually tell you things that when you're getting things wrong.
So we argue about, well, you know, the biggest argument is always around people, you know, is this person good or not, you know, should we, you know, should we promote this person? Should we fire this person?
You know, some of that's around our firm. A lot of that's around the companies we work with, you know, he, he works with a lot of our CEO S, he's kind of our, he's our among other things, he's like our management guru. So he's, he's the guy who basically works with all the sort of most, you know, high potential CEO S to help them kind of develop.
And so he develops kind of, he wrote, he wrote the book on it, he wrote the book on it actually a hard thing about hard things but its consequence, like he's very, you know, he's legitimately very opinionated about, about people, you know, kind of coming out of that.
I would say he's more focused on culture, he's extremely focused on the culture of the company that A CEO is developing and he applies that in our firm. But he also applies that to the CEO S that he works with. And so he really wants to understand when he's evaluating a founder. He really wants to understand what culture that person is building inside their company. I'm a little bit more open to variations.
I'm a little bit like I'm more open to like what he might call recklessness, or chaos. Or, you know, original thinking that maybe doesn't work, it might blow up in your face. And so I'm always a little bit more on the side of, you know, maybe we should like, you know, would you.
Speaker 3
01:08:21
Say you're more of a risk taker than he is?
Speaker 2
01:08:23
I would say it's different kinds of risks. I think we're pretty similar in aggregate, it's different kinds of risks. Here's I be curious whether actually he agree with this is, I think he thinks, and I think he's right, but I think he thinks there are kind of timeless ways to build great cultures.
Like the leadership is not a new idea, right? It's something that has existed for a long time cultures. His second book is actually on culture, right?
And he goes through, he talks about like Genghis Khan and the 
Mongols
 and he talks about like, you know, the Code of the Bushido and the samurai and, you know, kind of these, these cultures. And he's, he's very into that kind of thing.
And so he draws a lot of historical examples for cultures and he's like, look, these are these continuous threads of like, what does it mean to have people trust you to be able to bond together into a team, right? All all these things, the other side of it is, you know, look, people who come up with new ideas often have new ideas on everything.
And so a lot of the people who have new ideas on like technology also have new ideas on like management and culture and how to be a CEO and how to structure a company.
And do we really need all these meetings? And can we just run everything on video conference? And do we even need to have those or can we just do everything on slack? Right. And, and so they'll, they'll a lot of these founders will have these very creative original ideas on how to actually run their companies.
And I would say, you know, most of the time his speech to them would be stop, you know, focus your creativity in the area that you actually understand, which is building products, you're designing things and then just get good at running the company the way the companies have been run for hundreds of years, like, don't try to innovate on everything.
And I would say he's usually right on that, usually those experiments and a disaster.
You know, that said every once in a while they don't. And every once in a while there's a totally new approach and you know, it's just a case study of this right now is, is elo you know, Elon you know, we, we work with Elon. I've known Elon for a long time, but we, we've, we've not, we did, we were 
Tesla
 and 
SpaceX
 predate us as a venture firm.
So, but we're involved in his, in his 
Twitter
, you know, kind of acquisition and like Elon has a completely different way of running companies and, you know, it, you know, you can read about this, you know, the press, the press has covered this at length, right?
Like it is a much more blunt, chaotic, you know, hair trigger, you know, direct engagement way. He is very quick to fire people. He's extremely aggressive. He's gets micro man, you know, he micro manages the degree he's involved in everything. And you know, it's, it's a playbook that for most CEO S would lead to disaster.
Speaker 3
01:10:27
Wasn't that the case with 
Steve Jobs
 as well?
Speaker 2
01:10:29
Yeah, so Steve, this is good. This is a good point. So Steve Steve was a genius, Steve was a genius with the dark side.
And the genius was real and the dark side was real. You, you, you everybody seen the results and the results, you know, obviously make the whole thing worth it.
But like Steve could be really rough on people and there are many, you know, true stories about you being really rough on people and you know, this would be a great example is Ben Bens V would be, yeah, you just don't do that, you figure out how to be great without basically, you know, being rough on people like that.
And, you know, I would say, like, in general, that's the, that's the best advice, right in general, if you're coaching, a young kid on how to, like, run a company that, that you want them to try to calibrate that because generally if you're really, you don't.
Speaker 3
01:11:02
Really get anything for that behavior. Well, Steve did, well, we don't know that we don't know because he didn't have Ben coaching him.
Speaker 2
01:11:09
Ok. So this would be the argument. Ok. So this would be maybe the argument that Ben and I would have about it, which is Ben would say Ben would say what you just said, Ben would say no, that was purely disruptive. If, if Steve had not done that, he would have been even better.
Speaker 3
01:11:20
Well, we don't know, there's no way to know, but I do think that's a real question.
Speaker 2
01:11:25
It's a real question. I can make the other side of the argument. Tell me the other side of the argument is a players want to be in a company of all a players like the, the people want to be around other great people. Most companies are way too tolerant and indulgent of mediocrity.
Most companies are good at getting rid of just like what we call shit birds like they're, they're good at getting rid of people who just are clearly no good what they have trouble with is mediocrity, right? Good, but not great. And Steve just like, could not tolerate mediocrity. And so when he identified that you were, he actually had this, there was a term called flipping the Bozo bit.
And when he flipped the BZ up, he, he just, he fired you that day because what he, what he had learned over time and his view was that you never unlit wrong and you fire them on the spot. Like ho how do you know, like you're not telepathic? Like you just happen to be in that meeting and look, maybe his wife yelled at him this morning or maybe his kid just died. You don't know what.
Speaker 3
01:12:18
And also maybe he's actually right because it does happen sometimes.
Speaker 2
01:12:22
Exactly. Maybe he's right. Exactly. I'll tell you the conversation we had on this, that really made a big impact on both of us was with Andy Grove, who, you know, who was, who was best away. But when, when he was, running Intel, he was considered kind of the best CEO in kind of the history of the tech industry.
And and we, when we were young, we, we used to meet with him and he, he would help us on, on things and, and so one of the questions we had for him was like, wow, it always feels like we're firing people too late, right? It's like every time we fire somebody it's like, wow, we wish we had done it, like, nine months sooner. Right.
Speaker 3
01:12:50
Because they had done damage in that nine months or because you missed an opportunity for something better.
Speaker 1
01:12:55
Both.
Speaker 2
01:12:56
Well, it's, it's this flipping the bo a bit thing. It's, it's like, ok, we identified that they had an issue, a problem. You know, every once in a while people can turn it around most of the time in a workplace environment. If you've got competent management, when they identify that somebody has an issue, like generally people don't turn it like they just, statistically, they just generally don't.
And so you, you have this thing where like if you're running kind of the standard management playbook, you, you, you put people on what's called performance plans and you, you try to like more aggressively kind of coach them for improvement and then they normally don't make it through and then at some 0.3 months or six or nine months later, you kind of make that call.
And and actually the reason you put people on performance plans is because most companies are too indulgent of, of mediocrity. And so most companies don't aggressively performance manage along the way, they don't document things along the way. And you need to put people on the performance plan to have the legal justification for firing, firing them because you need that paperwork that you actually like did evaluate them.
But like, you know, you're just like, shit. Like I'm just, I'm wasting time. This person is doing a mediocre job. They're infecting the organization of mediocrity. I, I wish I could move faster.
So we a we asked Andy, we asked Andy, it is, you know, basically, like, you know, is it normal to always feel that you're firing people, you know, three months or whatever, nine months too late. And he's like, yeah, he's like, that's what it always feels like. And he said the reason is because if you did it more aggressively than that, the organization would be you as a sociopath, right?
And it's like, well, Steve didn't care like about being beautiful. Like, you know, he just, he was like, yes, we're just not, I'm not optimizing for what people think of me. I'm not optimizing whether people think that I'm nice, I'm optimizing that the people around me are gonna be at the top of their game and if they're not, they're gonna go. Right?
And, and he wants the exact same way, right? And then the, and then the results and again, this is the argument, right? Ben and I have is like, OK, 
Apple
 T space, you know, rockets at one of their butts, right? Like, you know, like, oh my God. Right? Is, is the ST Elon playbook, like the more aggressive playbook.
Actually, the one everybody should be having and, and Ben comment to that is no, most people will destroy their organizations. If they try to do that. Like, it doesn't actually work. I, I go through all of that just to say, yeah, that's, that's the kind of debate that we'll have and, and look, it's not resolved. Right. Like, and I, and quite honestly it's unknowable. It's unknowable. I don't think it ever will be resolved.
Speaker 3
01:14:53
Tell me why a company would choose to stay private and why it would choose to go public.
Speaker 2
01:14:58
So, most of the great business institutions that are around for many decades, most of them are public companies. And the reason is because they end up with a lot of employees, they end up with a lot of customers, they end up with a lot of constituents. They end up with like, you know, governments, you know, getting very interested.
Any that are private. There are big ones, I mean, I mean, I mean, there's a bunch there, there's one prominent, one would be Koch industries, Charles Koch. It's a giant industrial company and they do like, they're huge. Like they're, they're a giant, they're big. I mean, I don't know the numbers, they're just, numbers are just Titanic large.
They'd be, they'd be a fortune 50 company tomorrow if they went public. But they, he's kept it private the whole time. Bloomberg, is another, Bloomberg. The company. Bloomberg is another example of a big, that's a private, private company has always been private. Mike Bloomberg just owns it outright.
So, yeah, they they exist, but most of them end up public. And I think the reason they end up public is just because if you're an institution, at some point, you kind of have to act like an institution, you have to, you have to be trusted institution, you have to be. So you have to be transparent. People have to know what you're doing.
Public companies carry with them, this, these responsibilities to report to the public. You have to explain yourself in a way that's very open and you're under these very stringent legal requirements to do so accurately. So people tend to trust the things that public companies say more than private companies.
Speaker 3
01:16:04
Accurate are those results.
Speaker 2
01:16:06
So in 
the United States
, I would say quite accurate, either they are wholly accurate or if they're not, they're off a little bit outside the 
US
. It is still the wild West. So we went through, we went through a series of scandals in the, in the 
US
 business world.
We went through a series of scandals in the two thousands around Enron and companies and 
Worldcom
 companies of that era and the the stringency of the accuracy of the reporting and the level that you get reviewed by the government and the penalties to lying are quite high now and, and look like most people mo most responsible people want to run something that is like legitimate and genuine, right?
The the there's an old, there used to be an old thing.
There used to be an old thing I used to hear when I was a kid, which is like, you remember there was this gangster named 
Meyer Lansky
 that famously ran, ran, ran a big part of the, the, the mafia in the 
US
 and, and people used to say, well, you know, 
Meyer Lansky
 was so successful as a gangster if, you know, just imagine how successful he would have been if he was like, you know, running General Motors, right?
Like, and it's actually, I think that's actually untrue. Right. I actually think, like, you know, 
Meyer Lansky
 is actually very ill suited for running a big public company because you get caught lying, you know, and you break somebody's legs and like you, it's a big problem, right?
Like that's not what a trusted institution does, right? And so the, the, the best and the brightest actually I think want to be legit. They, they want to do something that's like, actually genuine.
And, and that's true for, you know, for companies as well. Look, having said that outside the 
US
, like, boy, like the scandals, I mean, even 
Europe
, like the scandals in 
Europe
 are like mind bending and then, you know, once you get outside the, the, the developed world, like things get really hairy.
So most, most of the world is not well developed on this stuff yet. But anyway, so there's the transparency, you know, kind of truth telling component to it. There's also the, at some point, you want to have a lot of shareholders, like at some point, you want kind of the world at large to be able to invest in your company.
You know, you want ordinary people to be able to have a stake in your success. You want kind of everybody to have your stock in their retirement plan because then it sort of gives everybody a reason to kind of root for the company. You know, at some point you want to be able to, you've got all these employees that you're paying in stock.
At some point, you want them to be able to sell their stock and be able to buy houses and send their kids to college. You also get what's called a currency. So your, your stock becomes a currency and so you can use your stock to like buy other companies, right? And, you know, it's easier to raise debt, when you're, when you're, when you're public.
And so they're, they're, oh, and by the way, a lot of, a lot of employees just wanna work for, they wanna work for an institution, they don't wanna work for some fly by night, start up, they wanna work for something that's trusted where they can, you know, one of the things I do with candidates a lot of the time is especially immigrants, kids, you know, some, some kid who's, you know, sort of a first generation immigrant, you know, is I, I'll literally get on the phone with their parents, you know, and this has happened repeatedly where, and I sort of explained to the parents.
Like, no, actually it's ok. It's ok if your kid doesn't go to work for IBM. Right. Or 
Microsoft
 or 
Google
, it's ok if they go to a start up because actually in the 
US
, that's not actually because with their, the parents are worried about career death if it doesn't work out. Right. And so there, there, there are a lot of people who just want to work for a stable, a stable company.
So anyway, so those are all the, the, the reasons to go public. The reason is not you, it just like, look, you're, you're exposed to all the scrutiny, right? And so you, you, you, is it only scrutiny or anything beyond s Well, so it's a consequence of the scrutiny. So you have a, you have a stock price, the stock price trades every day.
Speaker 3
01:19:01
But you start making decisions based on the stock price, but that's not your core business, correct? Changes your whole business model exactly.
Speaker 2
01:19:09
100%. That seems bad. Yes. Well, it depends on, yes. So it destroys a lot of this, this ruins a lot of companies.
So the easiest failure case is that you've been running your company just running your business the way you run a business and then all of a sudden you've got this daily scorecard and you're optimizing the daily scorecard or, or even if you can get through the day, you're optimizing your quarterly results, you're, you're reporting every 90 days and you're optimizing for that.
And so yeah, so when this, when this goes poorly, basically what happens is time horizon contracts, right? And so instead of planning things, 135, 10 years out, you're planning 90 days out and nobody can do anything great in 9090 days at the scale of these companies.
And so you just basically like, and this is this is when Elvis leaves the building, right? Like so, and, and by the way, often this coincides with this is when the founders stepped down and then they hire a professional CEO professional CEO S and sort of optimizing for their own compensation, they're optimizing on these short, short time frames.
So that's that, that's a big downside. There are ways to deal with that, but that is a, a big downside for sure.
Speaker 3
01:20:01
In your position, when you're investing in companies for 10 or 20 year trajectories, if they go public, how does that change your position? Because it's now they're playing a different game. Yeah, that's right. They're no longer playing the 20 year game.
Speaker 2
01:20:16
Well, they might be, there are public companies that do, right. So 
Amazon
 played the long game the whole time still does 
Apple
 played the long game. They were public the all time, 
Steve Jobs
 did the turnaround at 
Apple
. They were a public company. I look, 
Tesla
's been public for, I don't know, a decade. 
SpaceX
 is private, but 
Tesla
's public and Elon runs 
Tesla
 the exact same way he runs 
SpaceX
.
You know, 
Netflix
, you know, invest for the long term. You know, there's a lot of these companies that have, I think done a, you know, I can tell you, Zuckerberg, you know, at 
meta
, this hasn't changed how he used things, you know, look, it can be done.
It's a, higher competency, you know, it's a little bit more of a high wire act like you're, you're getting graded by the world on what you're doing and like, you know, oh, this is a speech we give the CEO S because they're like, oh, well, I'll just do ac jobs did, I'll just do whatever I want. It doesn't matter. I'll be like, yeah, but there's, you just need to imagine what happens when your stock drops. Like 97%.
You're on the front page of every business newspaper in the website, in the world. Talk, talking about what a turkey you are, right? Have you experienced that?
Speaker 1
01:21:06
Oh, of course. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 3
01:21:07
Multiple, give me a specific example. What's it like? Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2
01:21:09
It's just, it's, it's horrible. It's, it's awful. Yeah. No, it's happened multiple times. Most of these companies. There's this great form of a chart, financial chart. Called the drawdown chart. And the drawdown chart is basically its baseline is zero and then the chart is the percentage drop that the stock is experienced in point in, in different points of time.
And so it's zero to like a negative 100% right? So it's like this and then it's like what it looks like, it looks like somebody having a heart attack, it's a cardiac arrest. And so I just get the draw down chart for 
Amazon
 is really interesting because like, of course, 
Amazon
 is this just giant success.
But like, there have been like, I think five different times in the last 20 years where the stock has dropped like 97% or something like that. I mean, just like these massive crises of confidence where basically everybody's just like, yeah, this is, it had no profits for how many years, for a very long time, very, very long time, for a very long time.
Exactly. And so you, you were running? Yeah. Right. You were running into it. What, what Jeff had was and he talked about it publicly. He's like, look, we're investing for the long run, we're reinvesting every penny of internal profit back into the business.
We're building what they call intrinsic value in the business and we're just not going to hand out, you know, dividends to shareholders and the investors who went along for that ride did great. But, you know, it's easy to say that it's harder to do it when your stock graphs 97%.
And the headlines, I mean, there was a famous cover of Barons magazine in 2005. And 
Amazon
 at that point was already like 10 years old or coming up on it. And it was literally, you know, the headline was literally dot bomb, right? Like 
Amazon
 is going out of business, right? They're gonna be, it's gonna be worth zero.
I mean, I went to, I went to investor conferences in the early two thousands where people were just openly laughing at Jeff just like laughing at him in the in the meeting. Like you're just like completely full of it and look, everybody part of being a CEO is people are doubting you whatever when the entire world is doubting you.
Like it's just because what, you know what happened, you know what happens is like anybody who's had a bad career, it, they've had one of those moments. It has that which is like all of a sudden you're talking to your friends and your friends like, are you OK?
Right. Like how are things going? And then you go home, you, your family is like, are you all right? And you're like, yes, I'm fine. I'm the same person. I was, I'm, I'm not.
Speaker 3
01:22:59
Did you know Jeff at that time? Yeah. Yeah.
Was he fine? Yeah, he was fine.
Speaker 2
01:23:03
No, no, no. Let me, let me, let me say this like this is the 4 a.m. thing. I don't know. Since I was not sleeping with him today, we have a much closer relationship back then, back then I was not sleeping with him.
And, so what is he experiencing at four in the morning? That, I don't know. Right. And, you know, there's only really, you know, two people who are in a position to know that right, him and his wife at the time so that, I don't know, but to the outside world and to all of his friends, he was fine the entire time and he was fine the entire time because he's just like, look, we have a plan, we're exceeding the plan.
We're not gonna get shaken off of this. Now, look, you, you could also say, right, a fair response to what I just said, a survivorship bias, right?
Like here I sit talking about the ones that worked, like, what about all the ones that didn't work? Right? Because like a lot of times in the stock Market, you know, drives the stock to zero. It's because the company sucks and like it's gonna fail, right? And so like, that's the other side of it, right?
Speaker 3
01:23:50
There's no substitute for the thing times when the Market loses its faith in a company and it goes to zero, but the company still has value and then it comes out, back out of the ashes and reinvents itself.
Speaker 2
01:24:05
So our company, so our company, our company which sorry, Loud Cloud. Oh, sorry company, Ben, I started in 99 we went public in 2001. And then by 2003, by 2003, our Market capitalization of our stock was half the amount of cash that we have in the bank, right? And so had we just simply liquidated the company and given the cash back, we, we would have made twice your money on the stock.
And so what the Market basically said was, yes, these guys have, what, what that meant, what the Market was telling us the message implicit in the price was these guys suck so bad that even though they have this cash in the bank, they're just gonna burn the cash and there's not gonna be anything left to show for it. And then we actually, Ben, Ben, Ben gets most of the credit. He was running the company.
He, he turned it around and then we ended up selling, I think the stock went up 40 X off the bottom. We sold the company for 40 X that amount. And yeah, that was, you know, sort of a quote unquote turnaround. But 
Steve Jobs
, 
Apple
, so when 
Apple
, when Steve took 
Apple
 over in 97 when he came back, 
Apple
 had less than 990 days of cash in the bank like they were about to go bankrupt.
Like that's how bad it was in 2001. No 2009.
Ii, I had a chart I was carrying around in my pocket all through 2009, 2010 when we were starting, when we were starting the firm. And I think 
Apple
 was trading, I think they bottomed out at a price earnings ratio of like six.
And, and what, what that basically means a price earnings ratio of six. Basically, it's like what a steel mill trades at. If it's about to go out of business, it's like trading for the liquidation value of like the plant equipment like it, it's a super low. It's basically the Market hates you and thinks you're an idiot kind of thing.
And this was like, this is like right when the iphone was taking off, right? And so it was this like, but and there's a, there's a loose relationship between pe ratio and growth rate where we're roughly speaking pe ratio and growth rate should be about the same.
And so if a company is growing 10 per, if it's growing earnings, 10% a year, it should have a pe of about 10, sort of a loose a loose relationship. And 
Apple
 had a phase there where they were, the pe was six and the growth rate was like 40%. And then in some periods through there as high as 80%. And so it was like undervalued by like a factor of 10 just on like basic math and it was obvious to see that.
Speaker 1
01:26:03
Well, it was.
Speaker 2
01:26:03
I, I thought, I mean, look, I wasn't running public money. I didn't put money in my mouth was, I gave a lot of interviews at the time where I pulled out this chart and because the point I was, I was not trying to make a stock call. The point I was making is everybody tech irrationally like if the financial crisis, like everybody got negative about it after the the dot com, what happened twice?
So it happened after 2000. So what happened was the 2000 crash was like a real tech crash and tech really fell apart and there was like actually a lot of carnage and a lot of companies went under and then what everybody thought would happen was the global financial crisis of 2008 would cause that to happen again, but it didn't but they thought it was going to.
So they, they acted as if it would and they, they traded the stocks as if that was what was about to happen. And so basically 2008 to 2011, 2012 was just this extreme level of irrational hate and fear. And again, it's not like a super genius thing to be able to say looking because you're looking at it and you're like, well, I don't know this iphone seems like it seems like they're gonna sell a lot of these things, right?
And the same thing, 
Google
 was growing super fast, you know, 
Facebook
 was growing super fast and, but the world at large had just gone negative. Well, there's this famous thing in this or the metaphor for the stock Market is this famous thing. Now they say, so you think about the stock Market as a person in Mr Market?
And he's like full on, you know, clinically manic depressive, right? And there's just like certain times that Mr Market is just euphoric about everything. And there are certain times when he is just terminally depressed about everything and then we all collectively are Mr Market, right?
So it's a group psychology thing. And so it's very hard to be a participant in the world and not get pulled into the group psychology. But as a consequence, the Market goes through these wild, these wild swings and, and it, it does regularly go through periods where people are just irrationally negative.
And then of course, you know, and then it's like, ok, read the investor textbooks and it's like, well, that's when you buy the stocks and it's like, well, yes, but that's when everybody's in a horrible mood and anybody who buys these things looks like a complete idiot because everything, everybody knows that they're all gonna go out of business.
And so you talk about the consequences of being public, this is one of the consequences of being public is your, your companies get caught up in this. And, and you feel it on a daily basis in a way that you might not if.
Speaker 3
01:27:55
You're to be in a tech company that's not public and you're just looking at your bottom line and everything's fine and, you know, your business is doing well. Whereas another, the same company public all of a sudden gets caught up in this wave of things crashing and you crash with them. Nothing has changed in your company. That's right.
Speaker 2
01:28:13
Well, this goes to this relationship between, you know, the sort of metrics and management, right? And so there's this whole thing in management, which is you, you, you, you, you manage what you can measure, right? And so if you have a number right, that you can optimize on, you tend to optimize on that and you tend to run your company around that.
It's the same thing politicians do with polls, right? I, I, I've got a poll number and I'm just gonna try to try to optimize around that. Now, is that the optimal way that people are actually gonna vote? Like, who knows? But like you've said, that's what you, you've got, you've probably seen this in political speeches.
Have you seen this in political, do on TV, with political speeches or debates? And they'll have this thing where they'll have a focus group and they'll have a dial that they can go to like 100% negative 100% positive and then there'll be these red and blue lines and it shows word by word, it shows the mood of this focus group watching the thing.
And so it's like a stock price, right? For every word coming out of a politician's mouth. And so if you're a politician, do you use that as a tool to try to, like, optimize every single word coming out of your mouth and like, basically become the master of the craft of political speech giving or do you say?
Well, that's crazy. Like, if I, if I get wrapped up in that psychology, I'm gonna drive myself nuts and I'm gonna end up and end up being incredibly, you know, unauthentic and I'm just gonna be like a pure opportunist and it's this, it's, yes, it's the same thing with the, with the stock prices.
Speaker 3
01:29:18
You read a lot of history. Is this just out of passion or do you see some, some other use in understanding the past?
Speaker 2
01:29:26
It's a desperate attempt to predict the future.
So, so look for 30 years, like I've been, you know, I've been doing this now for 30 years. Starting companies are funding them. You know, statistically with what I do, it's like a 50% success rate, 50% failure rate, basically with the, with the, which is pretty good.
Speaker 3
01:29:42
Actually, which is pretty good. It's pretty, remarkably good.
Speaker 2
01:29:45
Well, it's pretty good. It's pretty good. I mean, it, it, it feels terrible.
It feels awful. It's like your business. I mean, it's like your business too. It's like, you know, some, sometimes the 50% is remarkable. Yeah. I, well, you know, for baseball it's great.
You know, there are other, you know, fields, you know, for test taking. It's terrible. Right. Like, you know, driving on PC H you got to score 100% right. So, so, yeah. So, like, it depends, like, look, and here's another thing like stat, so you're betting on things that are one in a million things. Well, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, let's say one in 1000 or something. Ok?
Speaker 3
01:30:14
One in 1000 things, 50% is really good.
Speaker 2
01:30:17
Look, yes. And just like in your business, the, the upside on the winners is bigger than the downside and the losers, right? And so if, if you're, if, if you have asymmetric upside on the winners and contain downside on the losers that 50% does does well over time, but the failures are just always horrible, right?
Like that, that doesn't get you statistically, you can know that intellectually, you can know that emotionally. Every failure hurts tremendously and, and it's wrapped up with people, right? So these are people that you care about, right?
And like one of our companies fails, like it's our, it's not gonna take our firm down because of the 5050 thing and our in our investors understand that, but like it's a founder who has poured five. I just, we had a company just, you know, the guys poured five years into this.
Right. And, like, it's gonna be part of his life and, you know, you know, some of these people bounce back and they go and do other things, other people just, like, at some point they're just like, I can't take it anymore and then they, they, you know, but not everything works, not everything works.
Exactly. Exactly. So that's real, yes, very much so. Right. And, and, and, and then there's, there's another thing in tech and in venture just got called the 
Babe Ruth
 effect, which is the home run hitters strike out more often.
And so, right, the people who are really trying to do something new and radical, actually fail, fail at a higher rate, which, which is for the defense.
That's right. Predicting the future of these things is absolutely impossible. Like that said, like, boy, I sure wish that I could. And so how do you ever possibly predict the future? And I do think there's some wisdom that comes from understanding in particular, the human dynamics.
So I think people do change. I mean, people have changed. I'm not, I'm not actually a believer that like, we're the same people, we were 100 or 1000 years ago. I think actually the people themselves might be changing.
But, in, in a lot of ways, but look people there, there, there are, there are, you know, constant to human psychology, sociology, behavior of, you know, human beings and crowds, there are cycles in history of different kinds. And so at least in the past, you can kind of go back and, you know, the risk of reading history is always, you know, the outcome and so the outcomes look inevitable after the fact.
But if you can kind of get yourself away from that and if you could, especially the the the history works that I really like are either contemporary accounts of what it was like in that moment to actually experience that or really the best historians are very good at recreating what it actually felt like to be there when it was all very uncertain.
And then look, there's also just a lot of, there's a lot of tools like you can just learn, you know, there've been a lot of great people who have navigated through very difficult situations like how did they do it?
Like, what's the tool kit? So, yeah, so it's, it's a desperate region of the past to try to learn whatever lessons they have to, they have to give me, can you think of an example where something you learned from reading history impacted a real world decision that you made in the present? Well, look, I was just say, look, rallying people after, after disaster, right?
Which is like, ok, there's been a catastrophe at a company like, OK, now you've got like, recore the team. Like, how do you do that? And, you know, how do you do that? Well, you gotta get up and talk to them. Ok. Well, how do you do that? Well, how did Churchill do that? Right.
Like that kind of thing works really well and look at, you know, these are things that most people have not done in a lot of cases. And so, you know, being able to learn from this is somebody said, you know, it's the history, you know, the best of history is this, you know, incredible intellectual conversation across brilliant people over time.
Speaker 3
01:33:11
You know, who have kind of learned from each other by, by basically, by reading are the top V CS, more of a group of colleagues and friends or rivals and enemies.
Speaker 2
01:33:19
Both co opet is we like to say so, we probably work together more than we compete. And the reason is because most successful companies race from multiple V CS over time across multiple rounds.
And so we end up on boards together and working with companies, but we do compete and head out, head on for deals and those competitions can get, can get, we punch each other and then it's pretty hard. We're in one of those right now and we're gonna try to punch another firm in the nose as hard as we can.
And so, you know, that happens and then I think it's like, it's like any business. It's like, actually, you know, the movie business down here is famous for it or, I don't know, music probably is also, which is, you know, you, you do end up with grudges, you know, you do end up with like two prominent figures who, like, really hate each other.
And it's like, you know, well, 20 years ago, one of them said something, you know, in a meeting and I was gonna, and I've got my, I've got my list be. Ben doesn't hold grudges. Ben's great at holding grudges. I hold grudges and, and Ben's wife holds grudges.
And so when, when 
Felicia
 and I get together, we like, we, we're like the anya star character in 
Game of Thrones
 where every night we recite the list of all the people that we're gonna be at some point. Yeah.
And like, I always, you know, Ben's kind of always got on me on this is like, you know, maybe you should let some of these things go and I'm like, well, no, actually they're quite motivating, like I'll tell you one thing that gets me out of bed in the morning is, you know, the opportunity to really stick it to somebody who I feel like did something wrong, you know, 20 years ago.
That's unbelievable. So I kind of like, I like my grudges.
They're very close. They're very, very.
Speaker 3
01:34:42
Important to me. Do all the V CS, do the same thing or does each House have a particular style or strength?
Speaker 2
01:34:47
I would say that the commonalities are, there's, there's a few universals which is basically, and it's sort of this triangle. It's basically team product and Market, is what you keep coming back to. So, are the people really good? Are they building a product that people want? And then is there a Market that they can sell it to? And it's sort of the most simple form of the whole thing?
And those probably are, you know, those are the most important things 50 years ago, those are probably the most important things 500 years ago, by the way, there's a long history of VC that predates all of tech, which we could talk about if you want. But, tell me about it. So, you know, 
Christopher Columbus
 shows up in the, what is it, the court of Queen Isabella?
And he's got this like crazy idea to discover or whatever it was the new route to 
India
 and he needs, you know, x whatever, whatever Spanish pesos at the time or whatever it was to be able to get off the boats. Like he was making a venture pitch, contain downside like, you know, on, on, you know, what, what's the worst thing that can happen is he burns all the money and the ship sink and everybody dies.
I constrained upside. Like what if he discovers, you know, the new world Right? And then of course, survivorship by us, we remember that story because it worked. We don't remember the 1000 others that failed, right? So he was raising venture capital.
There's a famous story, 
JP Morgan
 was 
JP Morgan
 was an investment banker who mostly dealt with debt for building out big things like railroads, but he sort of dabbled in venture on the side and he was a this is like 100 and 20 years ago. Now. He originally was, he was 
Thomas Edison
's first investor for indoor lighting.
And so he wrote 
Thomas Edison
 a check for the new lighting business. And he the, the first indoor lighting system, electric, indoor lights were installed in Jacob Morgan's the famous library in New York by 
Thomas Edison
 personally. And then three weeks later, they caught on fire and burned his library down.
And then he paid 
Thomas Edison
 to, to do it again, rebuilt the library and put in lighting and it worked. So he did it. The one that I find so fascinating is actually the the whaling industry. So the structure of the modern venture capital industry is basically, is very similar to how whaling expeditions were funded in the 16 hundreds, like off the coast of Maine.
And it was a very similar kind of thing where you had basically these captains who were the entrepreneurs and they would put together a business plan for a boat and a crew.
And they'd actually have, they'd actually have an equity model for how the, the crew members get paid. They get paid as a but basically on a portion of the whale and then they would come and pitch the, basically the way that the people who financed whaling journeys, the V CS at the time and the V CS were specialists in evaluating the captain and the boat.
The plan, the captain was a specialist in like figuring out questions like, well, we do, we go to the place where there have been lots of whale spotted, but those are the places other people are gonna be at or do we go to this other place that we think nobody's discovered yet?
And then, you know, I felt like a third of the boats never came back.
And then there's this concept, the way that V CS get paid is it's called, there's this concept called carry.
The term is carried interest and then the, the sort of colloquialism is carry and it's basic and the idea is basically, it's like 20% of profits, you know, for the ones that work, you kind of make 20% of, of the, of the profits or, or some number like that.
And it, it's called carried. And the reason it's called carried interest is because that's how the cap, that's how the captains got paid on the successful whaling expeditions. And it was literally, it was the percentage of the, of the whale meat and fat that the ship could carry.
That's where the, the term carry comes from. And so on a successful voyage, the captain would get 20% of the whale.
Speaker 3
01:37:52
It's interesting, both examples he gave her about light because the reason the whaling was such a important part was that's what was the fuel for the light before the electricity.
Speaker 2
01:38:01
Yep. Very fundamental. Yep. Exactly. That's amazing. Exactly. So, so look, it's, it's always been basically what you find, you have, you have this kind of entrepreneurial personality and it might be the captain, right? You know, or it might be the founder or whatever or by the way, it's a movie producer, right?
You, you have an entrepreneurial personality who has a record, you have, who has a vision, but they're not gonna be able to realize it on their own. They're gonna need to be able to gather resources to do it and then they're gonna need money and partners to be able to do that. And then there's gonna be some evaluation process.
There's gonna be some professional class of people who are trying to evaluate that. They're gonna be operating in this domain where they're wrong a lot of the time, but the, the successes make up for it. And so it's kind of this universal pattern and I think it's been running actually for quite a long time, but, you know, best guess would be, this will run forever.
Like this really runs for thousands of years. You know, the, the kinds of start ups that you'll have in 1000 years will be, like, totally different than what we have now. But they'll, they'll still have the model, they'll still have the same property, the known of it.
And, you know, look, they'll be reading histories of what we did and being like, wow. I hope that, you know, we can learn from all their failures. Right. So it'll be the same, it'll be the same cycle.
There's one more thing. It's like people get mad. It, I always find it interesting but, you know, because it's become very popular to kind of get mad at venture capitalists right now or kind of be mad about this whole process. So you mentioned like to move fast break things get mad about disruption. It's like, well, so fundamentally, do you want there to be new things in the world?
Because if you want there to be new things in the world, they're not going to show up predictably from well mannered people who are going to behave well in every aspect of their lives and then, and then the, the new thing is not going to disrupt or change anything like that's not what happens. Change doesn't enter in this kind of.
Speaker 3
01:39:34
It's always a revolution.
Speaker 2
01:39:35
Exactly. Right. And if it's not, it's not change. Right. And so would you really prefer to critics I said, would you really prefer to live in a world of total stagnation where like, nothing changes? Like, is that really what you want? And by the way, what do you think would happen in, in that world? Like, what would the politics be like? What would society be like?
And so, and I think, I think basically everybody would hate that. And so, but, but to live in the world in which the revolutions happen, you need to have a perspective and it's easy to say this and it's hard to do but you need to have a perspective that says, yeah, these revolutions like look, they're gonna be, they're gonna be wild, right? They're gonna be wild.
They're gonna upset a lot of things, they're gonna upset a lot of people, they're gonna upset power, relationships in society, hierarchies, gatekeepers are gonna be furious, right? Like old, you know, incumbents are gonna be furious. Governments are gonna get freaked like all that is gonna happen. But it is a direct consequence of the fact that it is actually changed, you know, dynamism happening.
And I, I just like, yeah, and nobody has ever figured out how to do this in a way that makes everybody happy. It's just a question of whether it happens at all. And, and by the way, there are many societies in which historically this didn't happen and what we know of those societies is they basically just died.
Speaker 3
01:40:33
If you look at the Fortune 500 over history. How much change has it had over what period? And what are the inflection points?
Speaker 2
01:40:44
It changes a fair amount. Although a lot of the changes that have to do with like mergers, like when two big companies merge, has anything really changed.
I'll just give you an example, you know, Time Warner here in town, Time Warner Discovery have merged and, you know, it's a sort of high drama in the, in the media business right now. What's gonna happen to that? But it's like, you know, look, 
Warner Brothers
 studio has been in business for 100 years.
If 
Warner Brothers
 discovery works, it'll still be 
Warner's
 Bro Brothers discovery in 20 years. If it doesn't work, it will get bought. And, you know, I don't know, maybe 
Apple
 buys it and then 
Apple
 will run 
the Warner Brothers
 studio for a while and then at some point they'll get tired of being in the media business and they'll sell it to, you know, I don't know 
Disney
 or so.
And so it's just like, you know, but it's still 
the Warner Brothers
 studio, right? And so I think in, in, in big company land, there's a lot of what looks like drama in reality. It's just kind of trade assets as trading cards being traded around, you know, is, are the movies any different than they were 10 or 20 years ago, maybe a little bit, but not really.
So, Yeah, I think a lot of the change is actually not real change. Having said that look, the sectors change a lot. Right. And so, you know, look, when, when, when there's like, build out happening in a sector, I mean, when railroads were new, they were most of the stock Market, right?
Pre tech, it feels like it didn't change so much, but like cars, we, we forget what was new at the time. Right? So like there was, you know, from the twenties to the fifties, cars were new, right? And so the car companies became, you know, the car companies were not big in the twenties and they become huge and dominant by the fifties.
You know, Ge is Edison basically, like he had to like invent all that stuff and before it existed, 
Ge
 wasn't a big company then it was so, and actually this is one of the things in history, one of the things that is useful in history, which is most new industries look like tech in the beginning.
And so I example of the car industry, actually, it's actually funny, the car industry actually didn't grow up originally in Detroit, it grew up in 
Cleveland
. And the the stories of the 1st 20 years of the car industry basically are these hobbyists and tinkerers and entrepreneurs and garages in 
Cleveland
 in like 1890 1919 10, trying desperately to figure out how to get like these car things to work Right.
And by the way, the car was greeted with like an enormous amount of fear and trepidation. Like, people were not happy about the car and like, a lot of States have these. One of my favorite stories about people reacting to tech is a lot of States.
Actually in the 
US
 did not want cars to be on the roads because what was on the roads was horses and people, and cars were dangerous and scary and loud and they freaked out the horses. And so the, a bunch of States actually have what they call red flag laws, in that time period where if you, you could have a car, but you needed to have the car, the car would break down all the time.
So you had the car, you had your mechanic that would go on the car ride with you, the car would only go like 20 miles an hour and that was, which was like super fast because it was faster than a horse. And then you had to hire a third, you have to hire a third guy to be 200 yards in front of the car with a red flag waving ahead of time.
So that, you, you said that the horses would know, the riders on horses would know to, to pull to one side and then, the horse lobby got really mad about this. And so they passed a Law in 
Pennsylvania
 where they said if a car and a horse encounter each other on the road, The owner of the car has to stop the car, disassemble the car into pieces, transport the pieces and hide them behind the nearest hay bale.
So as not to freak out the horse. And so, so what my, my point being like, what was that, that was the tech industry, like that was the disruptive tech industry of that time, the personalities of the people. I'll give an example like the car industry gm is like this, you know, giant company 100 years old.
There was this guy Alfred Sloan who was like the famous CEO of the whole thing who built it. But actually, there was a guy named Billy Durant who was actually the founder early on before that, he was like the Elon character.
And he basically, and this guy, his name is lost to history for whatever reason, but he basically created the modern car industry and he was, and you read the stories of him and it's just like reading about 
Steve Jobs
, right? Or Ted Turner, right? Or you know, 
Larry Page
 or Sam Oman or he's, he's one of these people. And so I actually think these patterns are, I think these patterns are actually older patterns.
Speaker 3
01:44:10
Who do you view as your biggest competitor?
Speaker 2
01:44:13
I mean, this, this the answer to this always sounds incredibly cheesy, but it actually is true, which is, it, it, it's, it's me, like by far, like this is the speech I gave inside our firm, which I very much believe and I give the speech to myself all the time, which is like, look, if we screw this up, it's our fault.
It, it's suicide, not homicide. And, and, and it's basically, it's because we were not, we were not as good as we needed to be.
We, we, we screwed it up like there, there was a way to do it and we, we, we blew it and, you know, maybe we blew it out of ignorance, but probably we blew it out of arrogance and ego and you know, hubris and then, you know, I think for what I think for what we do, it is fundamentally a people business more than a money business and being in a people business like every conversation matters, right?
And you're dealing with people's lives, right?
Is what I this is a speech I give internally is you're dealing with people's lives and when you're dealing with people's lives, you have to talk, you have to be very serious about what you say and you have to be very careful about the consequences of what you say and really think hard about every conversation and you know how it is, it's like, ok, it's a year, you know, we're entering year 15, I've had 400,000 conversations, the 400,000 at first conversation could go really wrong.
Right. If I'm not, like, on the ball and I'm much more, I would say I'm much more worried about that than I am about somebody coming in and, like, stealing our lunch money.
Speaker 3
01:45:27
Other than financial regains.
How do you know if you're good at your job?
Speaker 2
01:45:31
I, at that point I think it's basically what are people saying about you? Yeah. Look, the thing is though, like, look, it's, it's easy. There's, there's a paradox at the heart of that, which is like, it's really easy to get people to like you just by always telling them that they're smart and they're, they're good and that their ideas are good and, like, we don't do that.
And so the, the trick is do they still like you and trust you and respect you after you have spent telling the truth, you're telling them the truth. Exactly. And that's really.
Speaker 3
01:45:53
Your, it's your job.
It's like the, it's when you tell somebody the truth and you're giving them good news, they can trust the good news because they know when you had bad news you gave them the bad news. That's right. If you just say everything is always rosy, it means nothing. Yeah. That's right.
It's the bad news that gives you credibility.
Speaker 2
01:46:13
Yeah. That's right. But it's hard because absolutely people are under a lot of pressure and they get you probably, you know, probably have your life, they get upset in the moment and then maybe a couple of days later they're like, actually that was a pretty good point, you know, and look, if they know if, if, if they trust you, right.
I mean, another thing that I talk about a lot, Ben, Ben says this a lot is, he says trust and communication are opposites.
Everybody thinks they're the same thing. They're not.
If I trust you, we don't need to communicate that much because, you know that I have your best interest in mind like Ben and I could go, we better and I have this Ben and I could go off and not talk for three months and we would, we would come back, we have the exact same relationship on the other side because I have so much trust in him that I would know that whatever decisions he's making are in my best interest, right?
Whereas if you don't trust somebody, like you really gotta communicate, like you gotta like cross check everything they say and like roll them and interrogate them.
And so I think that, you know, the best relationships are, you know, this is what you try to develop is like, actually, you know, look, I'm gonna, I'm gonna tell you some things you're really not gonna like I'm doing that because I care, I'm doing that because I am doing.
Speaker 3
01:47:07
And you're also doing that because you're being true to yourself in saying this is who I am. This is how I see it, which is really valuable.
Speaker 2
01:47:17
Yeah. And look, I'm not gonna step in and run your company like I'm not gonna fire you. I'm not gonna like replace you. Like I'm gonna like this is not the thing that's gonna make or break anything. I'm just gonna try to help you get to the, get to the truth and right and have the trust relationship over time where you, where you, where you believe that that's what I'm trying to do.
Speaker 3
01:47:31
When you were in school in 
Illinois
, there was a supercomputer.
How many supercomputers were there in the world? At that point?
Speaker 2
01:47:40
A few dozen maybe total, most of them would have been in government labs. Most of those are the, those are the kinds of supercomputers used for like nuclear weapons development. Like so that why was it there? Cryptography? So, so the government would have had a bunch but not really anywhere else.
I I gotta, you know, I give got the government a fair amount of credit for that one. So I remember Al Gore got in trouble years later for saying that he invented the internet, the internet. And of course, that's not what he said. And what he said was he had played a role in the Senate in creating the internet and of course, that was actually true. So that that whole thing was actually AAA smear the whole time.
It was actually true and specifically what he did was, he sponsored these bills in the early eighties, which did two things. Number one is they created what were called the National Supercomputing Centers. And that was four universities that were given basically these grants to buy these very expensive and rare, you know, kind of things at the time.
And to give you a sense of how like, rare, especially these things were like in those days, like we, we had one of the, one of the computers at, at, at, at 
Illinois
, they literally built a building for the computer and the computer was so big that they built the building. And they left the roof open and they lowered after the building was built, they lowered the computer by a crane who made the computer.
There was a, actually, it's a company in, actually, it's incredibly a company in Wisconsin. So, it was a company called, there was a company called Cray. There was a guy named Seymour Cray who did a lot of it. And then there was this company called Thinking Machines. And there's this guy Danny Hillis who you might have encountered at some point.
So they were the, yeah, these kind of very, you know, kind of special entrepreneurs who were good at this. They became sort of famous. You've seen them, you know, you've seen them in movies. They, they, one of the, you know, they were so expensive. This is like 25 to $50 million and up. And this was, you know, this is 40 years ago. So this is, yeah, this is like equivalent of like 100 million or something today per unit.
But they actually, they, one of the things they really value design, so they actually looked really cool.
And they had like, you know, they were, they were water cooled. The heat heat is always a big problem with, with any kind of advanced computer. And so they, they did what's called water cooling. So they would have these very elaborate water cooling systems. There's a guy who actually bought one of these years later off of ebay and converted the water cooling system into a beer keg.
It's like the world's most expensive beer tap. So, but they, they were like works of art. And so you, you've seen them in different movies over the years. Yeah. So they were just like very, very rare, exotic things. And, and so anyway, so the, the Senate, the government funded these four centers at these four state universities because these, these, these computers made new kinds of science possible.
So these were used for like different astronomy, astrophysics, you know, decoding the secrets of the universe stuff. And then a lot of biomedical, you know, protein folding, developing new drugs, curing cancer, you know, kinds of research.
So, you know, there were, it was sort of becoming key to a lot of areas of science. And then, and then, they, they, they had enough money to put for these centers in place but they wanted to give scientists all over the country access to the computers and to do that they needed a high speed network to, to people can log in remotely.
And so, they funded what was called the NSF net National Science Foundation Network, which basically was the, it was sort of the internet pre the internet.
And, yeah, and so I, I sort of, yeah, my, my big struggle luck was it turned out 
Illinois
 where I went was a top computer science school at the time and it still is. And they were one of these four centers and so they just had this.
Speaker 3
01:50:39
Did you go there knowing that was there? I did.
Speaker 2
01:50:41
Yeah, I did. I didn't know if I didn't know that I would play any sort of, you know, I don't know, I didn't know how it would be to me but seek it out. Yeah. Well, I knew what was happening so that this was in the, you know, this was in the late eighties.
And so, yeah, it was big enough in the, in the computer and, you know, the computer industry was being covered in, like, you know, newspapers and magazines at that time. You know, this was, there were articles written about, this was how we experience it at the time. But, you know, I, I knew it existed and I, and.
Speaker 3
01:51:04
I have a home computer at that time.
Speaker 2
01:51:06
Yeah. Although when I got to college in 89 you didn't, the home computers in those days weren't actually useful in an academic setting. They weren't powerful enough.
Speaker 1
01:51:14
And, but you had.
Speaker 3
01:51:15
Experience on a computer before you went to college. Yeah.
Speaker 2
01:51:17
But on really simple computer. So, II, I sort of went from working on computers. It costs like, $400 to work in computers. It cost like $40,000 in like, one step. And so at that time they were a different, it was a, it was a completely different kind of thing.
So the computers that I worked on the college were just like, they, they were, they, like I said, they were like 4050 $60,000 baseline cost just to have something on a desk. And then these supercomputers were, you know, like I said, 25 $50 million.
So these were not one of the advantages of being in a 
UIUC
 at the time was that they, they had these, they had this, this equipment, but like, it, it, all of my work was not done in my dorm room.
It was all done in the computer lab, you know, with like fluorescent lighting and like drop ceilings and all this stuff because the, all this hardware was like, super exotic, you know, these days that doesn't exist as much. Your phone today is the equivalent power of that supercomputer that I worked on.
Your laptop is like, more powerful than that. And so today that doesn't happen if you just have a modern laptop, you have basically a full fledged computer that you could almost anything on. And then there's this cloud idea where you've got these grids of, you know, millions of computers up in the sky if you need more power.
So it, so that the sort of, I don't know, the romance or whatever of the, this exotic thing in a building being taken care of by feet and white lab codes. You know, those, those days are kind of over.
Speaker 3
01:52:29
In terms of what the supercomputer was capable of. How does that compare to, like, your laptop at home now?
Speaker 2
01:52:35
Yeah. So your laptop at home, like, you know, my laptop right now is a Macbook. I think it's an M two or, three M three processor and it's, yeah, it's, I don't, I haven't checked but it's probably somewhere between 10 to 100 times more powerful than that. So, for computer at that time.
Well, and in fact, you could ask a cynical question, o on this actually, or, or I could, which is, if those computers in those days were so rare and exotic and they were able to be used for things like decoding black to the secrets of like black holes.
And everybody has a laptop that does that today. Like, where's all the creativity. Like where's all the science, where's all the creativity, which I think is a actually a question, a very excellent question.
But yeah, look in theory, everybody has on their desk today and increasingly just in their pocket, they had the ability to basically do what in those days, we would have considered to be absolutely breakthrough, scientific work by the way, artistic work, by the way, another thing that happened in 
Illinois
 that is kind of lost history.
Illinois
 was the, there were a set of universities in 
Illinois
 was one of them because of this, that actually developed basically what we now think of as 3D computer graphics and ultimately developed what became, you know, CG I in the, in the, in the movie industry and the whole idea of computer graphic design.
And so when you see, you know, when you see a rendered tornado or whatever in a 
Hollywood
 blockbuster, it actually a lot of that is actually techniques that are actually developed also at 
Illinois
 and a few other places like that at that time.
And supercomputers originally, it was, it was so it was so hard to do computer graphics that were so processor intensive that it was only those supercomputers that could do that back then.
So that was another thing that actually was invented at that time, what was Mosaic. So basically, I ended up in 
Illinois
, I ended up working at this Supercomputing Center after a few other things. And then and then they had a group in that in the Supercomputing Center that was building the software tools to make it possible for people to use these computers.
And in particularly remember I said that the link between the big centralized computers and then the the internet, basically the purpose of the internet is funded by the government was for scientists to be able to access these computers remotely. But then there needed to be a new kind of software tool that was built to actually make that possible.
And so there was a guess we call called STG the software development group at 
Illinois
 that was in, in business to do that at government grants to build that software. And so 
Mosaic
 was a project that basically I a group of us did at that at, at, at that group. And it's, it's, it's nominal purpose funded by the government and its nominal purpose was and by the way, not funded for a lot, I was making $6.25 an hour.
So it was not a lot of tax money. But yeah, the, the purpose of it was basically remote scientific work. And so the, the, the the original purpose of it nominally was, you know, a scientist who wants to like, you know, basically publish information, have other scientists be able to read it online.
You know, 
Mosaic
 was the browser front end of being able to do that. And then we also had a cert we had a web with basically one of the first web servers that, that made it possible to, to, to store and host things. And so that was the nominal purpose. But then, because it was government funded, we were, we were able to give it, we actually had to give it away.
We're not allowed to make money on it. And so, we, we released it as open source and then we, and, and then the nascent internet was starting to get big enough where there were pe, you know, people on it, downloading it and using it and then they had ideas for other things that they wanted to use it for other than scientific papers. And then that led to the fly, the creation.
Speaker 3
01:55:30
When did you understood it could be used for more than scientific paper?
Speaker 2
01:55:34
Oh, right up front. I don't even think this was like prescience or anything. It was just sort of obvious, like it was just like, oh, you could, the thing is just, was immediately obvious was, oh, this could be used for newspapers. This could be used for magazines. This could be used for anything. Anything.
Speaker 3
01:55:46
It's a new communication tool.
Speaker 2
01:55:48
Yeah. And like, literally, I, I worked on a lot. I, you know, I didn't build all this myself but I, I worked on a lot of the early code for doing music online for, I remember when we first figured out how to do music in the web browser, I remember how we first figured out how to do video on the web browser.
And so I remember how, when the internet radio first started working, like there was this this project that we were, we, we were not working on, but I knew the people working on it called M Bone at the time, which is a the first music broadcast thing. And, and so there, there were a set of us where it's just like, oh, it's just sort of obvious that this is gonna be used for everything like it, it's a mcclune thing.
Every the the content of each medium is the previous medium, right? The the content of the movie is the stage play, right? You know, the content of the music video is the is the, is the music track. And so it was the same thing here, except this is the one where it's gonna be all of them, right? And so I just thought that was obvious. A lot of us actually thought that was obvious.
That said there were a bunch of purists who disagreed and there was actually there was actually a big fight early on about whether the there should be images in the web browser, images and web documents and the argument instead of just text because the argument was I bet you can predict the argument, which was, if it's just text, it all has to be serious, right?
Where you introduce images and it gets frivolous and then the frivolous will draw out the series and then everything will go to shit. Right. And I was like, that's what happened. Yeah. Well, a, that's what happened and b I'm glad that it did, right?
Like who wants to live in a world where you don't have images. And by and by the way, you know, there's a logical flaw, right? Which as it turns out there's a lot of shit text too. So like it's not, it's not, the text actually gets you guarantees of equal, either it's true.
And I, I, and I just, and for, for better or for worse, I always bias on the side of openness and creativity. Ii, I just, I want more experimentation in the world, not less. And so anytime anybody says, no, we need to constrain this, I'm like, yeah, no, we're not going to constrain this. We're gonna blow it up.
Speaker 3
01:57:23
You never know because you never know. That's what can't predict.
Speaker 2
01:57:25
Yeah, but you get with the bad with the good, right? Like, oh OK. So so guess what? So we rolled out images and web pages, guess. Well, I guess we're watching some of the first images that people put in web pages. Well, you know, let's say dirty pictures, adult content.
And so as my eight year old would say special parts.
And so, that started and by the way, it was, it's a cliche that like the internet was used for porn first. That's not really the case. It was always kind of a March edge thing. But, but, you know, the people did start to post post adult stuff, you know, and this is a government funded program at the time. And so this was actually the, the, this is actually the first free speech issue.
This was the first trust and safety issue which is my boss at the time said, well, you have to like, filter that stuff out and I was like, filter what stuff out. And he's like, well, like nudity and I'm like, like, how am I gonna know what, which, which pictures have nudity in them? Like, there's no way to do that. And he's like, well, you have to develop an algorithm that like detects nudity.
And I'm like, what, like through what like shapes like, like booby detectors, like, is that what you're asking me to make? And he's like, yeah, can't you do that? And I was like, no, I can't.
And furthermore, I won't and I just like, put my foot down and I said, like, we're not doing, we're not gonna, we're not gonna build censorship into the web. And, you know, that had, I would say like, potentially civilizational consequences.
Speaker 3
01:58:39
You're at 
Mosaic
, you're building what you're building, you could see a lot of things in the future. But how did you imagine the world in the future then? Versus how the world is now?
What did you see? And what didn't you see first.
Speaker 2
01:58:55
Is like, look the, the day job there, there's this kind of presumption. Oppenheimer actually went into this a lot. There's this presumption that the people developing the technology are somehow in a position to know the consequences of its use. And like, I think that's actually untrue on several levels. And one of them is just a practical level, which is most of what I was doing was just trying to get like code to work.
So I, I had like a day job which was like, all consuming. It was like 18 hours a day of just like writing software and trying to like fix bugs in software. And so most of what I was doing, what's, it's the old thing in art, which is when artists get together, they don't talk about art, they talk about where to buy the cheapest paint.
So it's like that like most of what I was doing was like mechanical, trying to like just get the stuff to work. You know, that said, look, I had, you asked me then what I would have said was look like, I think this is gonna be something that a lot of people are gonna be able to use and in those days.
That was a very radical concept because people didn't have the computers to use it. They didn't have the network connections. There was no broadband, there was no mobile, right? It was just, it was, people didn't, weren't comfortable with computers in the same way.
It wasn't clear that there would be any good, you know, who would ever publish any content. It was like an open question at that point. And so, you know, it was, it was, it was radical enough, I would say at that time to say this is something a lot of people are gonna use and a lot of people are both going to publish content on the internet and a lot of people are gonna, are gonna consume it.
And by the way, it's not just gonna be fixed content, it's also gonna be experiences and databases and, you know, they're gonna interact in different ways and chat and, you know, discuss things and, and so forth. We, we didn't have social networking, but we knew like we had chat boards and, you know, forums and stuff. So we knew there'd be a lot of communication, there'd be a lot of groups forming and, you know, you know.
Speaker 3
02:00:17
You spend time in a lot of groups. What was that like?
Speaker 2
02:00:20
Oh, it was great. Well, so, so for in my world at that point, the dominant thing was what was called use net and there, it was called the system was called use net. And then the, the groups are called news groups. And they were basically, basically, it's a bulletin board system that ran across the internet. And there was a period of about 1985.
The predating me starting in 85 to about 1993. So I saw four years of it where it was like digital nirvana. It was like the smartest million people in the world were like, talking about everything under the sun and text only text. It was you, you could like em, you could like embed images, you could like attach images but it was mostly mainly text.
Would it be conversations or more like essays, both, both, both a lot of essays and a lot of conversations around essays. And then there was a, there was a folder, there was a whole hierarchy. So you'd have all these different domains and so some of them were technical conversations but there were like lots of political conversations or lots of art and you could find the topic you were interested in.
Speaker 1
02:01:11
Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2
02:01:11
And you, you would pick the news group that had the topic you're interested in. Some of the news were 
UN
 moderated. So you could say anything, some of them were moderated. They had a human who would kind of keep them under similar to social media. Really. It was basically right. It was the form of, of, of, of social media. But, but what was fascinating about it?
In retrospect, it's, it's a lost golden era. It's been impossible to recapture a sense, which is, it basically grew to be the million smartest people in the world with basically no for no idiots or assholes. And so it was, it was totally like any, anybody in theory could be on it and anybody could, in theory say anything they wanted.
It just so happened that the only people who had access to it were like the best and brightest. And so it like there was no spam problem, there was no abuse problem. There were occasional flame wars, but like there was nothing, you know, there was no hate speech, you know, and, and, and then it's just the, the, the content quality was just incredibly high.
And the communities that form were like incredibly high and the trust level that form was like incredibly high, you know, people became very close, you know, across as, as they do across this with people they never actually physically met. And, and it was like this, it was like this nirvana of like, you know, what if you could just have the millions of other people connected to nobody else?
And then of course, then what happened was like everybody else showed up and, and there's this, there's this term in the internet culture called 
Eternal September
. And so it's based on the fact that it was September 1993 is when 
AOL
 connected to use net for the first time.
And all the 
AOL
, the 25 million 
AOL
 users or whatever it was at the time were able to be on use net and they just like, buried it in shit, just like completely destroyed the quality, right? And just swapped it and then use that basically died in September of 1993 and never came back.
Speaker 3
02:02:44
All that stuff still online.
Speaker 1
02:02:45
Can you find it? A lot of it is?
Speaker 2
02:02:46
So it's been preserved. There's, there's a thing called 
Google Groups
. 
Google
 has this thing called 
Google Groups
 and they have archives in 
Google Groups
 of a lot of these original things and for what these kind of things you're interested in, it would be what we're called the alt groups.
And so like alt dot Music. So if you go to 
Google Groups
, you could read like alt dot Music discussions from like 1990 I bet you would find them to be quite interesting.
And so 
Eternal September
 is sort of this idea that basically now the internet basically consists of September 1993 in, in perpetuity, which is like, no matter what good things there are, it's just gonna get swamped with basically people with, you know, either dumb people or people with bad motivations. So anyway, so it is this like, it is this it is, it was the Shangri LA of our of our.
Speaker 3
02:03:26
Experience are there ways to create gated communities online.
Speaker 2
02:03:30
Yeah. Well, so there was a famous, there was another famous, one of that era called the Well, which was it was an internet, it wasn't an internet system, it was a B 
bo
 system and it was Stewart brand, ran it and I think it had a total at the peak of like 3000 people. And there were two tricks to how he did.
The well, one was, I think he, if I recall correctly, I think he added all the new members. So it was like a club and then two as he charged, you know, membership fee. And so you had to kind of pass both of those hurdles to get in and, and again, for, for many, for many years, it was apparently really amazing, spectacular.
By the way, this is an idea that, you know, nobody's really cracked the code on this. But like, you know, this is, this is arguably like an undiscovered idea. You know, it's a known idea that nobody's figured out how to implement, which is like, how, how would you recreate that kind of thing today?
Speaker 3
02:04:08
It sounds really great. Yeah, exactly. And it sounds like we spend a lot of time scrolling through things. We might rather not if we had that more curated.
Speaker 2
02:04:19
But you have to be, you have to be willing to violate the, the dominant conceit of our time, which is, you have to be willing to say that not everybody's the same, right? And, and like, I look generally I'm a fan of like, like I said, I'm a fan of openness. I don't like the idea of like a people, you know, by Mike you or anything else or social acceptability or whatever.
But like, yeah, there are within the universal, within the universal global village. Yeah, I think, you know, it may just be that more people should start to carve out these more specialized areas. You know, there are some, you know, there are, there are a few of these, there are mailing lists that are like this.
There's often actually something that happens, often a new social media product will first take off with being incredibly high quality to start.
Well, fa 
Facebook
 was like this early on because 
Facebook
 started out just being 
Harvard
 kids and then when they expanded, they expanded to the top 10 universities and, and look the, like the kids at 
Harvard
 have lots of issues, but like at least they're at least in those, well, especially in those days, like they were, you know, 20 years ago, things have changed maybe even even since then.
But like, you know, generally speaking, if you want like a group of like, you know, 5000 really bright young people, you, you know, the the people going to the top universities are pretty good cross section. And so, you know, and, and And so there's this, there's this thing which is, there's, there's a, there's a pattern that we've all noticed which is new social networks start.
Well, a friend of mine puts it this way, which is the quality of any group can only decline over time. But because basically you only want to join groups that on average are better than you, right? You, you, you never want, you never want to down select, you never want to deliberately join AAA group.
That is depends, well, it depends what the axis, what the axis is. But like generally speaking, you want, you, you, it's, you know, it's the gross remarks. I don't want to be a member of a club that will take me, right? Generally speaking, you want to sort of, you know, you want, you want, you wanna go higher status by joining the group, not lowering your status by joining the group.
And so I have this, this friend who argues that basically the, the thing with social networks is they're not technology platforms, they're, they're groups, they're communities.
And the thing is on day one, they're the best they're ever gonna be and then they, and then they will inevitably decline and, but then there's a whole bunch of things you could do to try to basically arrest that decline if you tried. But you have to grapple with the fact that it's, it's gonna start out its very best, which means the selection process of who you start with is like, incredibly important.
And of course, the same thing is true of a company or any other kind of, you know, community. It's the same thing when you're planning parties, like it's, you know, it's, it's human dynamics. And so ar arguably there's like an unexplored design space for modern social networks that actually acknowledge that and didn't try to be everything to everybody and just try to be specialized like that.
Speaker 3
02:06:33
So I think it'd be nice for everybody to have the one that they want to belong to you to opt in. That sounds like a good thing.
Speaker 2
02:06:41
Look, you know, there are versions of this, you know, 
Facebook
 groups, there are some, some people have this experience with 
Facebook
 groups, 
Twitter
, you know, if you use 
Twitter
 in the right way and you like customized lists and you pay a lot of attention to who you follow.
You can, you can do, I've got a couple of 
Twitter
 lists that I think kind of count like this. And so you can, you can back your way into it, but it's not, I mean, the, the 
Eternal September
 has dominated for, for better or for worse. The openness has resulted in and how.
Speaker 3
02:07:03
Has writing code changed from when you were, when you were at school when you were a code writer versus writing code today? Is it the same language? Could you do it now? The same way you did it then you could.
Speaker 2
02:07:17
Yes, you could. So that those, all those tools still exist, those languages still exist. So I wrote, I, I wrote all my code in what was called a language called C and C is sort of it's sort of the native language of the operating system, UNIX. It's, it's sort of, it's one of the great kind of universal programming languages that people with the technical expertise are expected to know how to do.
It's an older kind of programming language in that it is very, the, the, the semantics of the language are very linked to the hardware of the chip. And so when you're programming C you are directly talking to the underlying hardware.
Like you, you direct, the classic thing is, you know, so chip processor and then there's memory and, and I can see you have to do what's called managing memory yourself. And so you allocate memory on the memory card, you, you fill it, you have to unallocate it. If you don't unallocate it properly, you get what's called a memory leak, the program runs, it gets slower and slower and then it ultimately crashes.
So you have to like do all that and it sounds like a lot of work. It's a lot of work and, and you, you end up in, I would say commuting very deeply with the machine, like you have to really understand how the whole thing works all the way down we call the bare metal, the actual physical silicon. Like you have to really kind of understand that. It's really.
Speaker 3
02:08:20
Sounds like a really good tool to learn either way, whether, whether you stay that way or not.
Speaker 2
02:08:27
So, the thing for a very long time, I think, and II, I had the bene beneficiary of this, I think the thing for a very long time that made a computer programmer really good was when they understood every aspect of how the machine worked all the way up to the graphics and everything, but then all the way down to the chips, sentimental in the design.
And I spent just as much time in school learning about how to like make chips and all this stuff as I did trying to make the software because it was like an integrated integrated system.
I think there's a, there's a critique which I think is a valid critique, which is, you know, probably in the last 10 or 20 years, a lot of programmers now become actually very good programmers, but they never actually learned how to do that and that's fine for a lot of things.
But like any time things get complicated where you need things to be super fast or you need them to be very secure or you need them to get scale to get really big. You do tend to need to bring in somebody who understands kind of what we call the full stack, the, the whole set of things that's not as common anymore.
So, so the overall trend that's happened in the last 30 years, 40 years is most programmers don't do what I was doing. They're not programming at the bare metal.
The way I was mostly what they're doing is higher level a call abstractions. And so they're, they're, they're in these languages that they just like languages, like kids learn in school where they're, they're much easier to code in. You don't have to worry about any of the hardware, the memory, whatever these so called scripting languages.
Python as an example, you'll hear where javascript where you're, you're, you're, they, they, they, it, it's easier, it's easier to get into the more po more powerful languages. The language does more for you.
So you can write like a new app faster than you could in the old days. But you've, you don't have that connection to the machine anymore.
That was the big trend for the last 40 years.
And then it just changed again basically last year and, and this, and this change last year, this year is the biggest change that any of us have ever seen, which is the A I, the shift to programming with an A I and in particular, basically the model that people have right now is one of either two things, either you just tell the A I, what code you want and it makes it for you, which, which works for like examples today but doesn't work for building full programs yet, although it will at some point.
But the thing that programmers do today is they have this model called a Copilot A I Copilot, right? And so the new model of programming is your writing code on the left half of your window. And then you've got an A I Chatbot U I interface on on the right side of the window. And as you write code, the chat bot is inspecting your code and talking to you about it and then you can ask it questions, right?
And so it can, if you're writing code, you do, you do a, you know typo or whatever a bug and the A I is continuously analyze the code as you're writing it. You can say, oh, that was a mistake. You should fix that right now. And you're just like, wow, that's great. Like I don't have to discover that the hard way later.
That's great, right? Or, you know, you could say like, I have here, I have this code that's gonna render something I need it to be faster. How should I, how should I make, how should I perform as optimize it? And a will say, well, you know, here's how you do it and here's how I, here's how I, the A I would rewrite it.
And so, or you can tell the A I to like make changes, right? And so it's like, I want, you know, everything to be, I don't know, it's like you're you wanna do a translation from 
English
 to 
Spanish
 and you can use the A I to like, find all the places where you have an 
English
 language word and you can swap into the 
Spanish
 translation and A I could do that for you.
And so it's like, it's called pilot. It's like a super, it's like a super assistant kind of thing. And so that's the, that's like a radical change.
And so the, the coders that are using that versus not using that today, they're pretty much universally kind of saying that's a night and day kind of thing. And then that's just with today's A I and what everybody expects is the A is in the future are gonna get much more sophisticated.
And so the, the, the sort of what the A I people basically say is in five years or 10 years, you're not even gonna have that, what you're instead gonna have is like the equivalent of like 1000 A I programmers working for you. And so you're not even gonna be writing code yourself.
You're just gonna be like, basically managing the A is to write the code and, and you can basically say, you know, we would go off and do all this design and just coding and graphics and like whatever it is and you, you basically hand out assignments and then the A is go off and do it and they report back and then you kind of oversee the entire process. And so if, if that vision plays out, that's a complete revolution, right?
That and that, and then the way to think about that is to think about this in terms of productivity, you know, how much software functionality can one person make in an hour or a day or a year? And what all of these changes mean is sort of an explosion of productivity. You just get to make a lot more code.
Speaker 3
02:12:22
If A I learns to code that really changes things.
Speaker 2
02:12:25
Yes. Exactly. Right. Well, and then that raises all these questions that you get into on all A I topics, which is like, OK, well, then is A I going to get better at coding A I?
Right. And so this gets into all the A I topics which we could talk about. But, but it's, it's a very, the reason I bring it up is because it's a very fertile, it's a very fertile moment for our entire, our entire world of technology rethinking how all this stuff works.
You know, this, this might be the biggest change that any of us have ever seen.
Speaker 3
02:12:48
What's different about A I, why is it so different?
Speaker 2
02:12:52
It's different because so it's, it's like a very fascinating story. So the idea of the computer, you know, goes back pre you know, the computer was invented as we know it, the computer was invented in the 19 forties during 
World War Two
 to basically crack 
Nazi
 and 
Japanese
 codes by primarily the 
US
 and, and, and English computer scientists, people like Alan Turing.
And so, you know, that's the, and that's the true story. That's conventional story. That's the true story. But the ideas are older than that. The ideas have to do with like machines that can like calculating machines. Right. So they were like mechanical calculating machines before there were electronic computers.
There was something called the abacus. The abacus was a form of this. There was also something called the Jac card loom. You know, textiles used to be weaved by hand. And then at some point you built a machine, a loom to do it. And then the Jac card loom, actually, you could program it. I've seen them. Yeah.
So you could, you could, you have literally punch cards and then you could, you could do and then patterns and so they're running basically a very rudimentary computer program in order to basically do patterns. And it's a completely mechanical process. Your piano player piano would be another good example. Yeah, exactly. Right.
It's not like Jar Loom player piano or not what we call turing machines, which is like there's no concept of a loop. Like you can't, you can't run any program on it, but you can run the program that generates beautiful textiles or beautiful music, right? And those were both big advances.
And so so anyway, so there, there, there were a lot of these ideas in those days which people are thinking, well, there was this guy 
Charles Babbage
 and this woman Ada loveless who like had a design for a basically an electronic computer in the 18 sixties that they were never able to build called 
the Difference Engine
, which is like you, you and you read the stuff, they were.
So 
Charles Babbage
 designed the computer called 
The Difference Engine
 that he fully designed. It is a great name and it would have been a great thing to build. There's this genre now called Steampunk. If you think about like the TV show or the movie Wild Wild West, there's an alternate reality genre called Steampunk where like all this stuff actually started to work in the 18 hundreds instead of waiting longer.
And so like, there's an alternate version of the universe where the difference is that what Steampunk is? That's what Steampunk is. It's like living in the future, but it's a lost future where like, you know, you have flying cars and mechanical, everything's retro, everything's retro, everything's retro with all of everything's built out of what they would have had in the 18 sixties.
So everything's out of like wood and chrome and steel glass, you know, not all, you know, there's no plastic, right? It's, it's, everything's out of the old materials. Yeah. So some of that stuff is really good.
But so anyway, like these are idea and if you read like the letters, like, so 
Charles Babbage
 and 
Ada Lovelace
 would send these letters back and forth. And 
Ada Lovelace
 was basically the first programmer and she was this young woman in like literally 1860. It actually had a tragic life story.
She died very young, but she was like writing software for 
the Difference Engine
 in like 1860 that and they never built 
the Difference Engine
, which means she never saw the software run. But like they saw it like the the the the ideas existed. And so anyway, so by the 19 thirties, there was this big debate that was already playing out and this is even before the invention of the computer.
And the big debate was do we model the computer after a calculating machine, right? So do we model it after the card loom, the the cash register, the player piano or do we model it after the human brain?
And they knew just enough about neurology and the function of the human brain and they knew the human brain was, they knew the human brain was obviously capable of doing things that a calculator calculating machine couldn't do. And particularly they knew the human brain is really good at patterns, right?
So the human brain is like really good at like image recognition, really good at like a language like here, here's a feature of the human brain. You can take a piece of text, you can take out all the vowels, right?
So you take a paragraph of text, the person hasn't seen before you remove all the vowels and you just leave the consonants, the human brain, you can still read that because your brain knows the patterns of words and letters and is able to fill that in a calculating machine based computer can't do that, the human brain can do that.
So, so there's some difference. It's like sometimes the term fuzzy is used so that the human brain is fuzzy. And the problem with the human brain, by the way is that it's fuzzy. And so like I, I, well, I remember tomorrow whether you were wearing that color shirt or some other color shirt, like who knows?
But like you and I will have been able to have this conversation in a way that a calculating machine never, never, never would have. And so there, there's the fundamental difference, right? Basically in there. And so these people in the 19 thirties knew that there was this difference.
And so they said, should we model these things after a calculating machine in which they are hyper literal, like you say almost autistic, right?
Which is like they're just like it was like Savant like machines where they're like really good at running large numbers of mathematical calculations very fast and then we'll give people, the ability to write programs based on that, but they're never going to be good at patterns. They're never gonna be good at language. They're never gonna be good at, they're never gonna know what anything means.
You know, they, they're always going to be hard to talk to. You're never gonna be able to use natural language interface. You know, they're never gonna be able to know the difference between, you know, the, the difference between a cat and a cinnamon roll and a photo.
Like they're just not gonna be good at that. So they'll be like hyper literal in that way, it's super fast but hyper literal and then humans will just still be completely different or should we try to build computers that are modeled after the human brain?
And, and so it actually turns out the, the first paper on the concept of the neural network, which is the architecture of Cha A GP T it was actually written in 1943. And the A I systems we use today are still based on the ideas in that paper. So it is 80 years ago, right? So they knew enough about neuron structures and synapses in the brain that they knew.
They were 43 1943. No, but, but they knew and by the way, look, the field of A I started in like 1943 like that actually fired the starting gun. And actually people have worked for the last 80 years trying to get neural networks to work and they finally just started to work.
But my point is like, they, they knew from the very beginning there were these two totally different ways of making computers and they knew what the trade offs were and they just were. But it just turned out that historically, they were able to make the one kind of computer for the last 80 years.
And that created the computer as we know it today. And then it turns out there's this completely other way to make a computer and that's based on the, it, it's inspired by, it's not the same as the brain, but it's inspired by the structure of the brain.
And as a consequence, it's a new kind of computer and a way to think about it is, it's a computer that's actually an A I computer is actually very bad at all. The hyper literal stuff, right? And so, for example, J GP T has this thing called Hallucinates.
And so if you ask it a question and it knows the answer, it gives you the answer. If it doesn't know the answer, it just makes one up.
Speaker 3
02:18:31
So it's more creative and less accurate. Exactly.
Speaker 2
02:18:34
Some, somebody once said that somebody said that one of the guys who studies this says A I is not like a computer, it's like a pretty good person.
It's not like the best person, but it's like a pretty good person. And what do we know about? Pretty good people? They're right. A lot of the time but a lot of the time they're not. And can you always tell the difference? Not necessarily, you know? Do they sound as confident when they're wrong as when they're right? Yeah. Do they know? No, they don't if you ask.
Speaker 3
02:18:56
It sounds like a real issue if we've spent 80 years establishing the fact that what you're getting back from a computer is more like a results from the results from a calculator.
But now we're getting these fuzzy results that are more like mediocre human results, even though we've had 80 years of what we think of as accurate, that could create confusion.
Speaker 2
02:19:23
So there was a court case about three months ago where a lawyer had Chet GP T write a legal argument to be presented to a judge in a court and it did it and it hallucinated several court cases precedents that don't exist and the judge caught, it just made them up, made him up and they sound great. By the way, they sound exactly like court cases.
The whole thing hangs together logically. It's just literally not true. It's mentioned cases that didn't happen. And so, and it turns out if you submit false made up court cases in court, you get disbarred as a lawyer, like you're done being a lawyer.
And so the judge basically like came very close to disbarring the lawyer on the spot and the lawyer is basically a lawyer. The judge is like, did you use judge EPT to do this? And the lawyer basically fessed up and the judge basically said, if you ever do this again, I'm going to disbar you and destroy your career. But it's exactly for that reason. But however, hallucination, creativity.
Speaker 3
02:20:09
Be a great scene in a movie. For example, we find in a movie.
Speaker 2
02:20:13
Well, so and it actually turns out so there, there are companies now building A I for lawyers and, and actually we, we, so we did a bunch of work, we haven't invested yet, but we've done, we've done a bunch of work in this space because one of the things that A I can do is it can like write, you can write legal briefs and if it doesn't hallucinate, they're actually really good legal briefs.
And so we, we've been talking to like professional lawyers about this and what the, what the professional lawyers will tell you actually is, you actually don't just want accuracy.
When you're thinking about writing legal briefs, you actually do want creativity because there are different ways to make legal arguments. And maybe the way that you've thought of on your own is not the best way to do it. And maybe if you had a copilot, right?
Think of you're writing a legal brief, you're a lawyer, you have a legal, you're writing a legal brief, you have a copilot. Right. And, and that copilot is just giving you ideas, right? And some of the ideas are going to be great idea.
Some of the ideas are gonna be terrible ideas, but they're all new ideas, the ideas where you don't have to sit and come up with them on your own. Right? And so what the lawyers are saying basically is like in that case, you actually, you actually, you want some hallucinating, right?
You, you, you don't want make up a court case that didn't happen but you want, oh, here's a different way to make the same argument, right? Or, or you might also view it as like if you're writing a closing argument to be presented to a jury like that, you know, as you know, it's like a storytelling exercise.
And so you might want actually, you know, some brainstorming, you don't want the thing to do it for you because you're the guy who has to stand up there and actually present it and you have to really be willing to stand behind it, but it might be helpful to have a writing partner that can actually help you do that.
And so there, there's this sort of double edged, like the fact that it Hallucinates is both a big problem, but it's also magical because we've never had computers that make things up before. Like that's a brand new thing.
If you had told me three years ago, we're gonna have computers that like make up like it's never, it's never happened. There's never been a way to do that. It's the same thing and now you're seeing it, it's the way to see this really clearly.
Of course, is visual design, visual art, you know, coming out of like mid journey or da or these things where it will make up all of these crazy art things and you know, look half the time it will make up like it will. And you know, there's this famous thing, they've figured it out now.
But for a long time, the way that you could tell that computer art was being made by algorithm was it just, it would give extra fingers, it just turned out that the training data it was trained on. It just like it just turns out like human, human bodies relatively straightforward, except that there are these like detailed finger appendages.
And if you are looking at a billion photos or pictures of people, they have fingers in all kinds of different positions. And so the early versions of the A I basically just didn't know how to do fingers accurately. They fix that now, right where it no longer does that.
But by the way, if you want it to, it still will, right? And so if you tell it, render me a scene where everybody has seven fingers, it will happily do it for you. And computers never used to be able to do that, right? Or if you just want to tell it to use it, one of the things you can do, it is really fun with these things is you can do it.
You can say like use your imagination or, or you can say another thing you can do is you can say, so there's this thing called prompt engineering. So it's how do you write out the prompt that tells the A I what to do, right?
So which is true for both a text A I and for an image A I do the prompt. And it turns out there was a research thing done by 
Google
 a few, a few months back about what's the optimal prompt that, that optimizes the chance that there won't be hallucinations that it's gonna be the most likely to be what's called factually grounded.
And it turned out the opal prompt starts with, take a deep breath really gives you the best results, right? And, and, and so, and, and, and this gets to the, the, the amazingness of what's happening. This is why we're also transfixed by this.
It doesn't have lungs.
Speaker 3
02:23:19
No, it can't, it doesn't breathe, it doesn't breathe.
Speaker 2
02:23:22
So it's not that but, but also look, if I tell you, if I ask you a complicated question, I say take a deep breath. I'm also not telling you to take a deep breath. What I'm saying is pause and think, right? What that's code for is pause and think so.
It's like, OK, so what you're telling the computer is pause and think, OK, that makes more sense because OK, pause and think, but then it's like, wait a minute, why do I have to tell a computer to pause and think? Like, why would that matter?
So it turns out why that matters is because the way these systems are built is they're trained on these g you know, giant billions and billions and billions of files of text and images that other people have created over time throughout all of human history. Like all that stuff's been fit in there.
And it just turns out that in the total material in all texts that everybody's ever written on any topic. Anytime anybody ever says, take a deep breath, pause and think it means that they're more careful in how they do their work, right? And, and they actually act differently in how they do their work. They go more slowly, they go step by step, they double check all their assumptions.
And so that's like encoded deeply in the sort of total collective unconsciousness of how we express, describing human thoughts. Such that when you tell the machine to do that, it kicks it into a very similar mode as that very interesting. And this and everything I just described, I would have been like committed to an institution five years ago if I had said that this is what we were going to be doing.
And now all of a sudden this is actually happening. And so that's the, yeah, so the breakthrough is computer, a completely different kind of computer that is able to basically synthesize and deal with patterns in, in, in human, human and human related expression language and photos and like images and videos and all these things, right?
That, that humans deal with eyes and ears, like all this stuff in like a fundamentally like better way that is based on an analogous to how human brains operate, but also very different. And, and so it's like this, it's like this, this brand new frontier.
Speaker 3
02:25:02
Tell me the open A I story. It started as a nonprofit, not for profit.
Speaker 2
02:25:07
It is and it continues to be a nonprofit.
Speaker 3
02:25:09
Tell me that story because there was a story about it becoming a for profit.
Speaker 2
02:25:14
So it's a, it's a, it's a nonprofit that owns a for profit.
So it's a, it's a nonprofit parent company with a for profit subsidiary. Is it a common that is not common? Has it ever happened? It has happened before? Yes. What was the, I'll give you an example. The Guardian newspaper in the UK is owned by a Trust 
Johnson and Johnson
, the consumer products company.
I believe it is owned by a nonprofit. I think the Lego company I think is owned by a nonprofit. I'd have to double check all these. But I think, I think these are all examples. There have been a bunch of examples like this.
So it has, it has, it has happened before. It is allowed, having said that there are very stringent tax laws that apply to this because you're not allowed nonprofits are not allowed to pay like high salaries, they're not allowed to, you're not allowed to do what's called self dealing. You're not allowed to like extract money out the other end because the whole point of being a nonprofit is you don't have to pay taxes.
And so the IRS supervises nonprofits that own businesses actually quite, quite strictly. And, and there have been people who go to jail when they, when they cross those lines. So you have to be careful in how you do this. But yeah, so basically, open A I started out as a nonprofit research institute. It actually didn't even start with the for profit sub, it just started with as a nonprofit.
It actually started, it was started by Elon Musk. And a group of people kind of that Elon brought together including Sam Holman, who's now the CEO is he the CEO? He is sitting here today. He is today, he is the ce he, once the CEO, he was fired and rehired, he was fired and rehired within five days. That's interesting. And they had two other CEO S in the meantime, maybe.
Speaker 3
02:26:32
You'll tell me that story when we'll get there in the in the history. Yeah, it just.
Speaker 2
02:26:36
It just happened.
Yeah, so basically, and, and, and, and so the, the, the true story that Elon has talked about this now in public. So basically what happened was Elon. So, so 
Google
 
Google
 obviously makes all their money on the search engine.
But the, the guys who started 
Google
 
Larry page
 and 
Sergey Brin
 were, came out of the A I group at 
Stanford
 and so they, they got trained up in all this A I stuff when it wasn't even working, right? They just, it was, they, they got 
Google
. They, they were, they were phd students at 
Stanford
 studying A I before they built 
Google
.
And so their, their kind of orientation in the world is basically A I and they, they basically always view 
Google
 as like a simple form of A I. And so, but they always aspire like if you read their interviews, they always said 
Google
 shouldn't have the 10 blue links. It should just give you the answer.
They, they always, and, and so they started doing A I research early on at that company when it first got started and they did it for many years. Yeah. So they, they basically launched an internal research group called 
Google Brain
 and they launched that, I don't know, 15 years ago or something.
And the goal basically was to develop A I and they actually developed the actual breakthrough. The specific version of the neural network that makes all these systems work. Now, it's called the transformer. And that was actually invented by a guy two guys I know wonderful guys in 2017.
And so that was like the key theoretical breakthrough that like finally made, made all this stuff work. But they were, was it owned by 
Google
? Yeah. Well, no. So it was a, it was, this was considered research, not development. And so the, the, the, the way that it was, it was like an internal scientific unit at a company. And so they actually published it as a paper.
I see. And, and they're actually, there's a long history of this where this is actually a lot of the great breakthroughs over time have actually come out of like industrial research labs like this. And then they, and then the company that develops, it publishes it and then they don't realize until later that they should have kept it secret.
But, but also the reason that they were able to hire all these great researchers out of all these universities is they promised them that they could publish their work, right? And so sort of part of the deal with these guys was that they would get to publish.
So they, they had this key breaker in 2017. So, but, but it sort of became clear in the 20 tens that like there was finally progress being made and some of these systems were gonna start to work. And Elon had some conversation with 
Larry Page
 who was running 
Google
 at the time.
And Larry said to Elon, you know, this A I thing is really gonna work and we're gonna end up with a is that are like, you know, much, you know, smarter and more powerful than people. And Elon said, well, aren't you worried that they're gonna like, have their own goals and they're gonna take over and they're not gonna want to surround anymore.
And Larry's, Larry's response was you're being species, you're being racist, but towards your species. And if they're a better form of life, then they should take over and we should all die and humanity should go away.
Now knowing Larry, I think there's at least a 50% chance he was joking, but Elon couldn't tell and took him seriously. And so Elon had a visceral reaction and was like, oh my God, like the big risk here is not just developing A I, the big risk here is 
Google
 develops A I and 
Larry Page
 is in control of it. And he does horrible, horrible things. And so he started, he's like, oh, so he called all these people who he knew.
And he said we need to start the competitive effort to that today and we need to call it, I mean, it needs to be as opposed to 
Google
's closed A I, it needs to be open A I and, and this was to protect the world is to protect the world in Elon's views, to protect the world. So, what Elon says is we need to go hire all the best researchers we can.
Speaker 3
02:29:34
It seems to be, that's what he's always done. It's like 
Tesla
 was, cars need to be electric.
Space X
 was, if anything happens to the earth, we could live on 
Mars
, he's always motivated by saving the planet.
Speaker 2
02:29:48
That's right. And, and, and, and humanity. Right. Exactly. And humanity. Yeah. No, I think that's true. Look, I mean, 
Tesla
 has been a climate story the whole time and, and still is for sure. From the beginning it was. Yeah, that's right. In fact, Tesla, as you know, like 
Tesla
 isn't just cars, they're also batteries, right?
Speaker 3
02:30:00
And he also, I remember him from the beginning of the first 
Tesla
 announcement was, and I'm hoping every car company steals our technology. That's right.
Speaker 2
02:30:08
That's right. No patents. He opens sources everything for everyone.
Speaker 3
02:30:12
It was always for everyone.
Speaker 2
02:30:13
That's right. That's exactly right. Yeah, that's right. So that's what he did here. And then what, what he did basically was, he said, look, if you're interested, if you're an, a researcher and interested in money, then you can go to work at 
Google
 and they can pay you a lot of money.
But if you, if you care about the mission of having it be open, then come and work with me and he, and he called it Open A I and he made it a nonprofit, not a for profit. And he said, you know, and then he said, basically, he said, everything we do at open A I is gonna be open sourced in the same way. Right. So he said, basically, if you come here, your work is all gonna get published, everything's gonna be open.
He, he even said early on, he said, the mission of open A I is to make sure that A I is, is is it happens and is safe and is universally available all of humanity. And he said it would actually be fine if somebody else does that and makes it available. In which case open A I will just shut down and be our mission will be complete. So it was set up as nonprofit, is registered as nonprofit.
He donated it what's reported to be something like $50 million to get it off the ground. And, and then a group of a group of people including Elana Selman and others then brought in a lot of these people, the Greg, these names now Greg Brockman and Ilya Suzie and a bunch of these like really smart guys and they formed this thing and they got underway and then basically, it's a lo it's a long story, long detailed story.
But in, in the beginning, it was like 2014 or 2015, they didn't have the transformer yet. So they didn't know how to make, like Je GP D work. They were primarily working on trying to have a, is that can play video video games in those days as sort of a proxy for being able to make decisions and so forth.
But it, like, didn't go that well. And so it was sort of start and stop and some things work and some things didn't. And, and so it was kind of, you know, kind of a little bit kind of iffy along the way as to whether it would work. And then basically at some point, stuff really started to work like the, the things all started to actually perform really well.
And then in particular, there was this breakthrough, there was a large language model breakthrough. And the way I've heard the story is, there was one guy there, his name is Alec Redford who had this idea for these language models and the rest of the organization thought he was nuts and didn't want to do it.
And he's like, no, I think we might actually be able to make this thing work and this transformer thing came out and then they started to get, then they did GP T one which was the first version of the text LLM. And then they were like, and then they did GP T two and they were like, OK, this is really gonna be a thing.
And then basically what happened that like around that time is this guy, 
Sam Altman
 basically came, he was, he had been sort of an original founder, but he kind of disengaged and then he kind of came back in and sort of he took control of it. Elon, there's controversy over this, but Elon Elon became less involved.
Sam Tm took control of it and then Sam did this very important thing, which is he created a for profit subsidiary under the nonprofit. And why did he do that? So what he, what he said, and I'm sure this is true. What he said was to make these large language models work, we need a lot of computer capacity and we need a lot of data. And, and we're gonna need to, we need billions of dollars.
Basically, he said, I know how to raise $100 million for, for nonprofits. I don't know how to raise $10 billion for nonprofits. It's just hard to do that. Not many of those running around. So he said, we're gonna create a for profit subsidiary so that we can basically sell shares in the for profit subsidiary, right?
And generate revenue and generate profits. And then then, then that's what we just raise the money because if we can't raise the money, we won't be able to keep going on this research, which means by the way, ultimately, it will be done by an actual for profit company, right? Like 
Google
 or 
Microsoft
, and then it won't open open A, I won't win.
And so he turned a, he turned what had been a pure nonprofit into a nonprofit that owns a for profit. The employees of the nonprofit became employees of the for profit salaries went up a lot, the amount of money that they raised, went up a lot. Their, their, their ability to invest went up a lot.
Speaker 3
02:33:29
What was Elon's participation for the original 50 million?
Speaker 2
02:33:33
So Elon has said publicly that he had nothing for it. What he says is he, it was a philanthropic donation. You're under tax laws, you can't just turn a for profit. You can't just turn in a profit into a for profit because it's a violation of tax laws.
And so, II, I think legally they probably couldn't give him anything. But anyway, he says he, he says he got nothing for it. And he, he has said in public basically, he's like, wow, that seems like a new trick. Why, why doesn't everybody do it?
And so he's, he has suggested over the, over the years that like there was something wrong with how they did this and you know, who knows? We'll see. But Sam made that change and, and by the way that worked, right, they were able to, they were able to all of a sudden start paying competitive salaries to 
Google
 for engineers.
They were able to buy all the computer power they needed, they were able to buy, they have you know, they have lots of money going into making training data. And so like that, that part of it worked and that's what resulted in Chet GP T that's why Chet GP T exists and that's why Dolly exists.
He did another thing along the way, which was he, he, he turned it basically into closed A I, so he, he, he, he, he turned it into a for profit and he canceled the part where it publishes everything and basically as of four years ago or five years ago or so, they stopped publishing their research and he did that under the theory that it is too dangerous to distribute.
It's too, it's too powerful, too dangerous and other people can't, can't have it. But there's some irony in that, which is the whole reason nobody exists is because that was what they were Elonis and were afraid that 
Google
 was going to do. Right. So, so, so anyway, so it's, it's, it's, it's been this rather dramatic, you know, kind of shift.
Speaker 3
02:34:50
Why was Sam removed and then replaced?
Speaker 2
02:34:53
So, we don't fully know yet, you know, they're, they're relatively opaque organization. A bunch of stuff has been reported. You never quite know, you know, whether what's reported is true or not.
There are gonna be many investigations in the months and years ahead, you know, from government and there's gonna be litigated lawsuits and there's gonna be a lot of, there's by the way it's multiple books written about this already underway. There's gonna be a 
Netflix
 series, I'm sure. Right. And so we, we, we will, we will learn a lot in the, in the years ahead about what just happened.
Is 
Microsoft
 somehow involved, 
Microsoft
 is very involved. How, how is Microsoft Microsoft is their major investor and so they have the for profit in the for profit. And so they have raised $13 billion in 
Microsoft
 right into the for profit.
And, and, and they have this very elaborate, complicated structure. So they now have the structure. They're still a nonprofit at the parent company level, but they have this for profit city area. And then they have this very complicated system for how they account for investor money versus donation money and how things get paid out. It's what they have this new structure they've invented called cap return.
So if you invest money in the for profit, you get paid out up to like a 10 X return on your investment. And then after that, the profits all go back to the nonprofit. There's what's called a waterfall. So different investors investing at different times get precedents for how the money comes out. And then 
Microsoft
's just the vast majority of the money.
So they have tremendous control. They have, you know, kind of the most outside control of anybody, you know, but it's a nonprofit, they, they can't operate, it's just a business. And so they've got this additional nonprofit overlay all investors who invested in this thing over the years, signed paperwork that very specifically said you are investing in a for profit sub of a nonprofit.
It would be best if you thought of this as a donation, not a financial investment. And then they say, but you know, that's probably ok because who knows whether there will even be money once we have a I anyway. And that's like literally in the document, right? And so like everybody's invested, who's invested in this is kind of known, you know, that, that that's the deal.
But then they have this additional thing that they are very kind of vocal about and public about, which is this idea of A I safety and this idea of this, you know, the original concern of like is A I gonna like basically wake up and like destroy everything and take over and wipe out humanity or, or, or just cause damage and, you know, one of 1000 other ways.
And so they also have this thing built into their, into their structure, which basically says if A I, if they conclude A I is too dangerous, they'll basically just like shut the whole thing down.
Speaker 3
02:36:57
What, where's the line of dangerous?
Speaker 2
02:36:60
That is a very good question. That is a, is a question that every expert in the field has a different opinion on there is heated controversy over it. I, I am on the side of what's known as the accelerations.
I think they basically either is not a line or if there is, it's so far out in the distance it's not worth thinking about and we're, we're close to it and we shouldn't worry about this. There are a lot of people that are called safety tests, or that sometimes get referred to as the doomers who are convinced that the line is like already like we're almost there and we might trip it at any moment.
There was a news story yesterday that I don't know if it's true, but it suggests that there were a group of people inside open A I that basically blew the whistle and, you know, hit the red button and said it, it just got too dangerous and we need to kill it right now.
And so there's reports that this played a major role in, in Sam getting and Sam getting fired. You know, there's irony to that because in the wake of Sam getting fired, they all decided that they were gonna go work for 
Microsoft
, which is just a, you know, big for profit company that presumably is not going to care as much about safety.
So if, if, if this is such a concern that they're gonna fire Sam over it and shut it down, why are they all gonna go to 
Microsoft
 which is probably even more dangerous?
And then Ilya, the chief scientist actually flipped, he reversed himself. He, he actually fired Sam. He was on the board and he's the guy who fired Sam. And then 24 hours later, he reversed and actually said that he actually wants Sam back. And so there's this debate over why he changed his mind.
And was it because he decided 
Microsoft
 was more dangerous than Sam? So this is like a whole, this has been the drama. So this has been the thing that's been consuming the industry for the last week. It's been this spectacular, amazing, you know, kind of just like, you know, meltdown 
resurrection
, that kind of thing that's happened.
Every question that you just asked the question you just asked just remains a very open question, which is like, ok, again, based purely on the reporting, have they, have they discovered? So the reporting basically is that they've discovered for the first time, a self improvement loop. So the, the, the claim is that they've, they've discovered a loop that basically where the A I can improve itself.
And the A I safety, doomer people safety is the polite word, doomer is the pejorative. Now, those people basically say, if you have an A I that can improve itself, then it will inevitably become all powerful because it will improve itself and then improve itself and then improve itself compounding all the way up.
And they call this the takeoff scenario. And the takeoff scenario basically is you get into an improvement loop. And like within, you know, conceivably 12 hours it's become super God, right? And it takes complete control of nuclear weapons and you have 
Skynet
 and like the whole thing, what's.
Speaker 3
02:39:13
Really interesting about it is because it's built on human models and the way humans work, if a group of humans had ultimate power and could press a button that would turn off half of the world that would likely happen.
Speaker 2
02:39:33
Well, most human stories, the good guys win most human stories. When the bad guys win, we call it a tragedy, then we feel bad about it.
Speaker 3
02:39:43
You know, I mean, the good guys wrote all the history books to the history books. Impossible to know who the good guys are.
Speaker 2
02:39:50
We have 8 billion people on the planet today. You know, far more than ever before. You know, the world has never ended despite the threats of many apocalypses over time. Oppenheimer, you know, the nuclear weapons, you know, the whole point of Oppenheimer is nuclear weapons are gonna destroy everything, nuclear weapons didn't destroy everything, nuclear weapons actually probably prevented 
World War Three
.
Right. So it turns out developing the developing to do is a device thus far, thus far. Yes, thus far, 100% thus far. Right. Exactly. Well, but like, look, if you had just been through World War, we've forgotten how bad 
World War Two
 was.
If you had just been through 
World War Two
, like the expectation of all the military planners in the 19 fifties was 
World War Three
 was right around the corner and it was gonna be a land war in 
Europe
. I guess the 
Soviets
 and it was gonna kill 200 million people. And look, we still have troops in, in 
Germany
 for that reason, like 80 years later because we thought the Russians were going to invade.
Right? And, and, and, and that, what was, that looks like, what was gonna happen? Like, I think most historians are like, yeah, that was highly likely to happen.
Speaker 3
02:40:40
And basically, it was only the threat of global destruction in 
World War Two
, the 
Russia
, we were on the same side as 
Russia
.
Speaker 1
02:40:45
Exactly.
Speaker 2
02:40:45
We were and then it flipped hard in the, in the years that followed very hard. Well, and, and look there, you know, there's all kinds of questions around this. Like we, we don't even, I don't even think we have like a good history of what happened in the 20th century. Look, the 
Nazis
 were very, very bad.
The Communists killed even more people, right? Like, you know, look, we turned over half of 
Europe
 to the 
Soviets
 and they turned it in, you know, we brought down the Aaron curtain and they killed many millions of people and they imposed into a horrible dictatorship and like surveillance society and, you know, 
East Germany
 is just a fucking nightmare, right?
Of what they did to those people. And we did that all to protect them from, you know? And so, yes, good news is we from the 
Nazis
. Bad news is we turn them over to Communists. Like, there's like some big, like, I, the idea that there was anything morally pure or clear about 
World War Two
, I think it's just, like, completely fake.
Right. It's just only because we have this mythology around it. Like, it, it, like, you know, I don't know, like, it seems like it ended very, very badly and, and I'm not saying, you know, I'm far from saying that we shouldn't have done it but like, you know, have you really achieved a great moral victory when the guy who killed more people is the guy who wins, right?
Like, like, how's that going? Right. And we spent the next 50 years, like, literally terrified that there was gonna be, you know, some combination of either 
World War Three
 or Nuclear Armageddon. And then the plot twist is the threat of Nuclear Armageddon probably prevented 
World War Three
.
Right. And. Right. Exactly. And so, like, ok, that's in our history. Like, that's real. Yeah. So look like a, I is gonna get trained up on that right now. By the way, the other thing is it's very easy to, it's very easy to anthropomorphize a, it's very easy to impute, well.
Speaker 3
02:42:08
All it knows is what humans.
Speaker 2
02:42:11
That's true. But also it doesn't know things the way we know things. So it, it's, it's not a brain. It's not after the brain but it's not a brain. It, it, it will give you I'll give you a bunch, bunch of differences. So it, it hasn't been evolved. So, so you and I are the result of 4 billion years of evolution where it's been a pitch battle for, for survival across that overwhelming period of time, right?
And why do you, why aren't you being so crazily violent and always killing each other? It's because that was 4 billion years of evolution said you just like you're fucking trying to kill the other guy because if not, he's gonna kill you in eu, right? So like every living organ organism is the result of 4 billion years of biological pressure inclined towards violence.
A is, are not like that at all. Like they, they, they, they have none, they're not of all their program, none of them program like that way. And so they don't work like that at all. You know, look whatever there is to like a human spirit or soul or personality or a sense of consciousness or identity, the machine doesn't have that at all.
Speaker 3
02:43:00
Like, I mean, J GP D is not answering but maybe that's the thing that saves us, the soul. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. It, it's, if it's got all of human thought without the soul seems dangerous.
Speaker 2
02:43:13
I don't know. Well, so here's the other thing though, like you can also test this, like you one of the interesting things about. So the the fictional portrayals of 
A I
 are all basically, they're, they're all I think they're actually inspired by like fascist 
Nazi
 aesthetics and ideology.
The assumption is they're gonna militarize, right? It's like Sky Terminator, it's like the case study of this. It's like, you know, basically the 
Skynet
 is basically machine version of 
Nazis
, right?
And it's even in the, in the iconography and the chrome and the the the the steel and the machinery and the evil, pure malevolence and the red eyes and the concentration, the concentration camps in the movies and the death machines and like all this stuff and, you know, in the matrix, it's like they're literally harvesting, you know, human biological essence for energy, like, you know, so it's, it's all this like fascist, like top down like death machine kind of thing.
But when you actually use these systems, that's not how they act at all. In fact, generally, the way they come across when I use them is they're very curious, they're very open minded and by the way, they're happy to engage in moral arguments. And so you can ask them lots of questions about like, what is the proper way to live a life?
What is the proper way to organize the society and you might agree or disagree with what they tell you. But like, they're pretty, it's pretty representative of what most people have said over time and it's kind of like they'll, you know, happily tell you that generally speaking, people should be nice to each other and generally speaking, people should respect each other's differences.
Like, it's not like it's not terminator, it's, it's something else. Right. And, and, and what is that? Something else? It, it, to your point, it's the composite of all of human experience.
But also it's not, this is very important. There's no, there's no, it in the way that we think about it, there's no person, there's no, there's no little person in there. There's no, there's no, I understand, right? It's not there.
So there's no point of view. Another way of thinking about it, what it's doing is it's generating 
Netflix
 scripts, it's generating 
Netflix
, it's generating machine. All it wants to do is tell you a story that you're gonna like.
Speaker 3
02:45:03
Tell me the different categories of software between the internet and my eyes, everything. What are all of those things that happen? What are all the different processes that happen software wise like using 
Netscape
 as an example of one of the pieces, but it's not all the pieces. So what does, what, what are all the pieces you need?
Speaker 2
02:45:27
So somewhere there's a piece of so say there's a piece of content you're looking at a web page that content is stored in a storage system somewhere.
So stored in hard drive somewhere that's stored that is managed by a computer called a server that could be a, literally a computer sitting in a closet somewhere or it could be on, on in a cloud which is basically just a giant collection of computers kind of run, run as a big grid.
And then there's, there's the hardware server computer and storage and then there's this, it's called server software. So there's the software that gets the request for the content and then responses with a request there, the.
Speaker 3
02:45:60
Software would be built into that system. No, it's not a, it's not an added on piece.
Speaker 2
02:46:04
Yeah, it's, it's there server software. It's called a web servers piece of software which would run on a server computer. So, so the server, so usually the terminology we use is client server. So client is like what the user uses and the server is like what's running in the background somewhere.
And so when I say server, that both means that can mean both the hardware itself of a computer in a closet somewhere. Or it can mean a piece of software running on that computer that does server like functions that tells it how to be a server basically. So their server software running up in the cloud that's.
Speaker 3
02:46:33
Always connected to the server. So it wouldn't be a general one that you would talk to other servers. It would only talk to that server, the software.
Speaker 2
02:46:41
So the simplest case is just a single computer, a single server computer with a single piece of server software on it. Now, in practice, most of what you have today is much more complicated than that. The systems have evolved to become a lot more powerful. And so probably what's actually happening.
Like if you're looking at a web page today is probably you're accessing the server is a cloud of like a million computers and you're just hitting randomly one of those computers versus another one and there's a network switch that's balancing across the million other people that are trying to access the same content at the same time. So it's, it's become a very elaborate, you know, plate spinning exercise on the back end.
And there's these giant businesses like 
Amazon
 web services that that, that manage all that, but it's still the same, what do you experience is still the same thing as far as you're concerned. It's just a server, it's just giving you content. There's probably two really critical Other things that happened back there, one is, there's a lot of work that goes into making this fast.
And so there's, there's this process called caching. And so like there's probably another server that is actually closer to you that's like at the telecom company that use your wire wireless provider that has like a copy of that content already on it so that it doesn't have to actually go all the way up.
And so there's this, it's called caching systems, performance systems. And then there's all these security systems, you know, the servers can get attacked, right. There's lots of hackers that want to like break in or disable these systems. And so these days, they have all these defense mechanisms to be able to fend off cyberattacks.
Speaker 3
02:48:00
What would they want? What would a hacker want to get into it for?
Speaker 2
02:48:03
So a couple of things, one is to get a lot of it is to try to get the user data. So to try to get your name and password and credit card number or theft or they might want to maliciously change the content deface it, you know, graffiti artist, it's digitally or they might just want to destroy, they might want to actually take that that server offline, they might not want it to exist anymore.
And what, what they do and they don't want it to exist anymore is the bad guys will do what's called a denial of service attack, which is Ad Os or D OS attack. And basically that means that the bad, the bad guys basically set up, you know, a large number of hostile computers to just barrage the server with like too many requests and cause it to basically melt down.
And so there's all these elaborate systems by the way, the Chinese government does this. So the the the Chinese government has the, we know that we know that because it's not been well documented. So one of our companies was the first company that experienced this.
So the Chinese have what's called the Great firewall which prevents their, their citizens from looking outside. The Great firewall consists of millions of computers that are being used for censorship and filtering.
They have a capability to turn the Great firewall into something we call the Great Cannon. And so they can turn it into an outward bound attack and it's so big and so powerful that it can overwhelm any sort of small internet company.
And even for the big internet companies, this could be hard to fight off. And so there's actually these pitched, there's almost these pitched digital wars that take place where the Chinese or other happening all the time or it's on occasion. Well, the Chinese aren't always doing it but there's, there's always denial of service attacks. Somebody is always trying to do it.
So it's, it's actually not that expensive to run a denial of service attack. You might even just do it for commercial competition reason. You know, it's Christmas, you're competing with somebody if you're nefarious, right? What you would do is you would basically mount to denial of service attack against your competitors website so that they couldn't sell anything.
Right. And I, I'm sure that's happened too, right? And then there are these things called botnets. And so one of the things that computer viruses do is if your, if your computer gets a virus. It gets basically recruited into a botnet and your computer ends up getting used to do these attacks or by the way, your toaster or your fridge. Right.
So there, there's this, like, yeah, so there's this, like, there's this digital war that's kind of constantly taking place constant. Oh, North North Korea does a lot of hacking. They do a lot of hacking for financial reasons. They, they fund a lot of the, their military through, hacking for financial crimes and then they, they hire, third party, hacker rings on the internet to, to do it for them.
And so, and then there's now, and then by the way, there's also like mass propaganda efforts. And so a lot of nation 
States
 now have what they call covert influence teams where they're, you know, and then that form of the attack is to upload lots of fake content, right?
And to try to overwhelm the, you know, the real content or, or, or whatever, you know, whatever, right. Like create lots of fake accounts. So there, there, whenever you are these days, whenever you are doing that, your computer is kind of maneuvering very elegantly through this kind of digital firestorm that's happening all the time.
And so you generally never notice it but it is actually happening. But the, the amount of brain power and computer hardware that has been spent over the last 20 years trying to get these systems to be good at repelling all these attacks is actually quite, quite staggering.
It's like this, this whole para parallel kind of Cyber Cyber War taking place. And of course, this is just the very beginning. Like these, these wars are gonna get like much more intense in the years ahead. We, we haven't yet had like a full, basically like military war that's been accompanied by a cyber war.
But like what, you know, what everybody's worried about is like, OK, like it for somebody in 
Russia
 where decide to invade 
Germany
, for example, with the first thing they do is take down the 
German
 power grid, you know, I don't know, maybe, right?
And so you know, or, or, or basically, or, you know, maybe hack into all the self driving cars and cause them to all drive off the road or crash into each other, right? And so there, there's real world consequences more and more to, you know, to, to all these things. So anyway, so that's what's happening on the outside.
And then basically, you've got your, you know, Wi Fi or whatever here or your cell connection and then you've got your computer and then your, your computer corresponding with your 
iphone
 or your 
Mac
 has, you know, many layers of software to basically deal with all that.
Download the content, render the content for you, you know, that takes place in the web browser, you know, usually or the operating system somewhere then present it to you in a good way and then let you interact with it. And so that, that that's what's called the client.
Speaker 3
02:52:03
All there is, is the browser on your side or is there more than a browser?
Speaker 2
02:52:08
Yeah. Well, the browsers have gotten very complicated, right? So correspondingly the browsers are also not very sophisticated. And so for example, your brow, I'll give you an example, your browser has all sorts of security countermeasures in it also itself.
And so if you download a piece of content that's been compromised and has like a malicious worm or virus inside it, your browser and your operating system have ways of detecting that and, and, and, and, and preventing you know that from infecting your system.
So it's got that it's got all kinds of things in there for performance, making everything fast. It's got, you know, things in there for dealing with video and music on the.
Speaker 3
02:52:37
Simplest level, forgetting the war aspects of it, even though those are real world concerns, the actual connection is pretty simple. It's a server talking to a browser right over the internet.
Speaker 2
02:52:51
And you can still do exactly that like you, you, you can still run it exactly that way that still works in, in practice, nobody does that anymore because it's all gotten much more sophisticated behind the scenes, but not in a way that you would ever notice if all of the other complicated stuff is doing its job. Right. You never notice that it even exists.
And so you, you experienced fundamentally the same thing you would have 20 years ago and it's just part of the magic has taken place. Like there's, there's a huge amount of plumbing that's been built that makes all this work. That it's just kind of, you know, you know, many hundreds of thousands of very smart engineers have been 20 years, you know, and big huge industries have been built trying to get this stuff to work.
By the way, all gonna get another thing is gonna get more complicated. So A I is now gonna get used for planning and executing cyberattacks and A I is also gonna get used for defending against them, right? So a browser three years from now will have an A I built into it that will be doing cyber defense for you. And again, you may never know that that's even happening, but it will be kind of doing that on your behalf.
Speaker 3
02:53:43
How much time do you spend on 
YouTube
?
Speaker 2
02:53:44
Quite a bit, quite a lot.
Yeah, it's, it's an amazing. It's, I mean, you know, I for me, it's almost entirely long form, you know, it's, it's discussions, podcasts, even audio books, but it's just like the repository of information knowledge on 
YouTube
. It's just, yeah, incredibly staggering. And then actually a lot of music, I do a lot of music listening on 
YouTube
 now.
Speaker 3
02:54:01
Has it replaced other forms of visual media.
Speaker 1
02:54:06
Yeah, I think so. Yeah.
Speaker 3
02:54:07
Less television, less movies, more 
YouTube
.
Speaker 2
02:54:10
Well, no, I don't watch, so I don't watch my, so my eight year old watches 
YouTube
 and preference in television movies. I don't do that if I'm watching television or movie, I want a very specific experience. It's usually with friends or at the end of the day and I want to watch, you know, whatever is the best new movie or whatever.
So I'm not like, I, I'm, I just don't have the mode of like sitting and watching 
YouTube
 videos or TikTok videos the way a lot of people do. And it's just frankly, the life of time, I'm sure it would be very fun. But for me, it's basic, it's actually mostly actually for 
YouTube
 is audio content, mostly for me, it's an audio source.
So I, I'm, I'm an audiobook podcast, spoken word guy, you know, like two hours a day, you know, driving around and running around and doing everything, getting ready in the morning. And so it's usually either I'm listening to a 
YouTube
 slash podcast or an audiobook. But you but 
YouTube
 has been taking a bigger and bigger share of that.
Speaker 3
02:54:53
What was the piece you recently the optimist, what.
Speaker 2
02:54:57
Was it called? The techno optimist manifesto, techno optimist manifesto.
Speaker 3
02:55:02
Please explain it to me. Yes.
Speaker 2
02:55:04
It's both radical and not radical at all. So this is my history. Obsession comes in So it's very radical and that it just, it says these things that we have very radical, which is technology is overwhelmingly net good. Capitalism is overwhelmingly net good. And basically the more technology and the more capitalism we get, the better things we're going to get.
And I describe sort of in detail why that's the case. I describe in detail what the arguments are against that and why I think that they're wrong. I also described by the way, the limits to that position. The things that I'm also not claiming, but it's basically, you know, it's a call to arms for the kinds of people who build new products, build new technologies, build new companies.
You know, I describe right up front in the piece that basically, I think we have all been on the receiving end of a demoralization campaign for the last 15 years to basically convince us that all these things are bad and evil.
And I think it's basically, you know, people, it's a demoralization campaign is being run by people who are very threatened by change and people who are very resentful and bitter and we should not let them demoralize us into not making things better.
And so, yeah, I, I really kind of went to town. I was inspired by a lot of prior manifestos. One in particular that I enjoyed tremendously, which is the futurist manifesto from the Italian futurist art movement. And the like around 1910. So I, I don't know that I, I don't know that I, I hit the bar of the futurist manifesto but that was kind of my, that was my sort of inspirational kind of starting point.
And of course, that was an artistic aesthetic movement, not a technological movement, but it was at a time when they were very obsessed with new technologies and what new technologies would mean for art. So I hopefully I got a little bit of that flavor in there.
Speaker 3
02:56:31
When is technology in that negative? Yeah.
Speaker 2
02:56:34
So, so when it kills a lot of people, when it, you know, basically when it causes misery, right? So, you know, look, fire, you know, I talk in the manifesto like all of our both optimism and fear of technologies is embedded in the myth of 
Prometheus
 who is the God that brought fire down from the mountain man.
Fire is the life giver. Fire is the source of light and heat and cooks food and serves as, you know, warmth at night and scares off the wolves. And it allows us to mount, you know, defense fire is also a means of attack and you can use fire to burn somebody to death.
You can burn down an entire city, you can fire flaming arrows. I've been reading about the history of in the middle of 
Middle East
 stuff and they they, one of the reasons that they discovered there was oil in 
the Middle East
 is because they were, the, the, the 
Arabs
 of that region were early adopters of Napalm.
In the mid 18 hundreds, they discovered a way to basically take petro, you know, chemical petrochemical substances and, and basically make, you know, essentially early Napalm with them.
So like a lot of people died by fire and I mean, look like what is ammunition, you know, what's you know, we read about shelling, taking place somewhere, you know, that's bomb, they're setting up bombs, fire is the weapon of a bomb. Fire is the weapon of you know, the catalyst for a bullet. Fire.
It's a huge power source is, you know, what does a nuclear weapon do? Is it generates fire, right? And so it, it's, it's like it's all in there, you know, but, but the thing is like you can say that basically, like it's really easy. The same thing, like I'm drinking water, you can drown in water.
You know, you can use a shovel to dig a, well, you can use a shovel to close to death. It's a tool and I won't go so far as to say, tools are value neutral in that, you know, they carry consequences with them and specifically, they carry consequences to the ordering of human society, which is ultimately the thing that's being litigated when we talk about all this stuff.
But that said they tend to have both you use cases and it is, you know, it is arguably easy to get carried away and just assume that it's only the upsides and I think it's also very easy to get carried away and to say that it's mostly downsides.
I think most arguments about technology are not actually arguments about technology. I think the arguments about the ordering of society, I think most people opposed to technological change are not actually opposed to the technology per se. They're opposed to what they see as a diminishment of their own status and power.
I think that's why the, you know, the news industry is so anti tech is because they view it as a challenge to their own, you know, their traditional gatekeeping role and their, and their historical businesses, you know, look is societal change, good or bad, you know, it depends, right.
You know, we, we, we are all very happy, we don't live in the society order the way that they were 4000 years ago. Like that would suck. But like, you know, is all societal change good. You know, probably not. We, we live in a society today where suicides are rising.
Well, OK, something's going wrong, right? Like, and you know, so what caused that to happen anyway. So I maybe I, I think all of the important questions around technology are actually questions about society which are questions about people.
But if we use the fear of societal change and paranoia about technology to prevent progress, I think that leads to stagnation and I think that creates problems that are almost certainly worse, but I'd actually link it to politics, I think to politics.
This is not a right wing or left wing observation, but basically what you find is when societies grow, they tend to have a positive sum mentality, right? Where some people can rise without it being a threat to everybody. Because everybody kind of views that there's opportunity when societies aren't growing, you get zero sum politics, right? For me to get something, I have to take it away from you.
And I, and I think what, what happened basically is our society downshifted to a slower rate of technological development and a slower rate of growth in the 19 sixties, 19 seventies. And I think that's culminated in basically zero sum politics both on the American left and the American, right, where, where they've got increasingly negative and hostile and you know, kind of destructive.
And, and so to me, like the clear answer to anybody who doesn't like the way politics in the 
US
 are going, the clear answer is we need growth to get growth. We need technology. Like that is the actual answer whether people will, will buy that or not. I don't know.
Speaker 3
03:00:16
Tell me something you believe. Most people don't believe technology is good.
I don't know, I think a lot of people believe that.
Speaker 2
03:00:23
So, yeah, so that is, that is unfair. So this is another distinction I'd make in the, in the I make of this a bit in the essay which is, it's actually not the case to your point. It's not the case that most people are negative about technology. It's the case that most elites are negative about technology right now.
And so, and, and, and again, I think they're negative on it primarily because they view it as a threat to their power and status as elites. So I, I would say if the form of the question is, what do you believe that other elites don't believe like that, that would definitely be the answer to that question.
Oh OK. I'll give you one, I'll give you one. I'll give the flip side of it, which is developing new technology is like creating anything else. It's, it is an elite art form. It's an elite, it's an elite process. Not everybody can do it. Yeah, it's, it's, it's gonna be a very, very, very small rarified group of people who are gonna be able to do it.
Speaker 3
03:01:01
What's the furthest out conspiracy theory that you believe?
Speaker 2
03:01:10
Conspiracy theory?
I don't know if this is a conspiracy theory I think was right about the collective of unconscious. I don't know if that's a conspiracy theory. Maybe that's more just a me me metaphysical theory or something. I think there's a collective human experience. I, I have a, I have a completely materialist explanation for that, but I don't know that he did. I don't know that, that the material explanation is sufficient.
Speaker 3
03:01:32
And do you think of yourself as a spiritual person?
Speaker 2
03:01:35
No, no, I'm a, I'm a scientist and a technologist all the way through and I apply the scientific method to everything. And, I, but I, I'm also like, because I read a lot of history, like I know that there are very sharp limits to that, to the explanatory power of science and technology.
It does not explain most things. It's not a, it's not, in fact a general purpose tool. And there is a lot that we do put it this way, the amount of things we don't know, far exceeds the number of things we do know.
I mean, look there, you know, this is physics, physics is a field, it's like, totally hung up. Like they, they sort of hit a brick wall 50 years ago and like the rest of the questions of like how the reality of the universe is structured and matter and everything else is like, basically still unknown.
And so, like, how much can we actually understand?
There's a great book I read about that one time. It really struck me called, it's called The Half Life Of Facts.
And it turns out basically, if you go across time, it turns it. So, you know, radioactive material has a half, half life is the amount of time it takes for half the radiation to, to, to, to fade. So it's like this curve.
So this guy basically says facts have a half life. Like anything, any given anything human society at the moment believes is, is a fact is like, and you know, there's different half lives and he talks about the different models, but, you know, it's like on average within 50 years that will no longer be a fact and we will just be so confident that we will, will have, you know, it's like Newton for sure.
Thought he had like orbital orbital mechanics figured out and then it turned out no, like relativity was like screwing everything up, right.
And like, and then, you know, Einstein thought he had relatively figured out and then quantum mechanics came along and just like, completely freaked him out. Right. And so, like, even those guys, it, it turns out the things that they knew for sure, actually turned out not to be right now. By the way, those things that they knew were very useful while they knew them.
Right. It's just, they weren't actually the underlying truth. And so II, I guess I would say yes, I, I am very open to underlying truths that we don't yet know. I, I, at first I don't know how to get there spiritually, but II, I don't want to rule anything out.
Speaker 3
03:03:24
Where would you say you're the furthest out on the fringe?
Speaker 2
03:03:32
I, I'm not on the fringe at all in my daily life. Like, I have a lot of friends who are very, like, they're super drugs, you know, you know, the whole burning man, like all hallucinogen. Like I'm not a hallucinogen guy or anything like that. So I don't like, I'm not, I don't do like helicopter skiing, paragliding. Like I, so there's a lot of things that I'm not out on the edge on.
I, I'm very bourgeois personally, but I am extremely open to new ideas and particularly, you know, obviously new, new, new technological ideas, new business ideas, new cultural ideas, like extreme. I, I, I'm like reflexively default open and that's just like incredibly rare in practice. And I, and I, and, and quite honestly, it's, it's most people over time develop scar tissue around new ideas.
Most most new ideas don't work, right? And so like, generally your experience throughout the course of your life is people throwing up new ideas that are actually like bad ideas or ideas that don't work. And so generally as people age, they actually get less open, they, they get kind of more set in their ways, they have more rules to how they think about things, all of my scar tissues in the other direction.
It's all ideas that were good ideas that I thought were bad ideas. And as a consequence, I didn't take seriously enough, fast enough. And so my big lesson over time has been, I need to be more open ee every day that goes by the le lesson the universe teaches me is you need to be more open minded.
And so I'm, I'm getting more and more open minded as I get older. It was great. It is great. It's great. It's, it's very fun. It's great. I know a handful of people who have been able to do that over time, you know, at more advanced agents and I really admire them.
But it is really, and I enjoyed a great deal. It's very fun. And I, you know, I, I teach, you know, we teach it inside the firm. We, we were very deliberate about it. But it is weird because it's like, I'm on a very, I'm on the opposite trajectory of almost everybody of my age. Cohort.
Speaker 3
03:05:05
Well, it's a really humble place to be, you know, you, you, you accept that you don't know, you don't know.
Speaker 2
03:05:12
Yeah. Like, look like, who am I who? Like, why on earth do I have the knowledge and insight and predictive capability to be able to say this idea is a bad idea. And the answer is I don't, I really, really, genuinely don't. Yeah.
But look, and part of that is, goes back to the, the venture thing. 5050 thing we're talking about. It's like, look, a lot of new ideas are better. Right. Like a lot of them are actually bad ideas, but that's ok. Right. Like there are going to be a lot of bad ideas and it.
Speaker 3
03:05:35
Is, can you think of an example of something that was pitched to you, that you perceived as a bad idea that turned into a very good idea that maybe even changed the world.
Speaker 2
03:05:43
Well, I mean, look, this A I stuff, like, I mean, look, I was trained on a, I, I was trained on all this stuff, neural network in the eighties. There was a big a album in the eighties. It totally failed. The conclusion from that was the stuff will never work. You know, I had that conclusion along with everybody.
I just kind of took it by default judge, you know, GP T or whatever. These are big breakthroughs in the last year that are very kind of shocking even to us of how well they work. But we, we knew there was, there was an arc that was playing out, but I will tell you before 2012, I would not have told you that I would have said, yeah, I know that field is dead.
This is like stick a fork in it. Well, here's another thing like, you know, look, I, I don't know if this is true. Oh, tell me if this is true of art also. Is there a prehistory, like, is there a prehistory to music where like when there's some big breakthrough in music. You can look back after the fact and you can be like, actually somebody tried that 10 or 20 or 30 or 40 years earlier and it, it's usually a cycle.
Speaker 3
03:06:28
Like I can remember when grunge happened.
It wasn't that exciting to me because when I was younger, I got to experience Aerosmith and Aerosmith was my generation's version of the rolling stones.
So if you were alive in the sixties, the stones were it? And then you were, if you were a kid in the late seventies, it was Aerosmith. But then in the eighties, late eighties, it was nirvana, right? But it was all the same thing coming back around again. Ok.
Speaker 2
03:07:04
And what would have been the origin point? Was it delta blues or something even older than that?
Speaker 3
03:07:09
Yes. But I don't even know if there's an, if you could say there's an origin because it probably goes back to you know, indigenous music.
It's, it's all, there's always been music, it's always building off something from the past and changing and finding a new way or a new piece of technology comes along or a new instrument comes along and that changes everything.
Speaker 2
03:07:33
So I think with what we do, I think there's more of a material component to it, which is, there are certain things that are just not possible until they're possible.
And so there are discontinuous breaks like the story of 
Charles Babbage
, like he couldn't build the difference machine. He didn't have the technology, the technology at the time did not permit it. It was not possible for him to do that. But by the 19 thirties, 19 forties, it was possible.
So there, there, there are, there are discontinuous changes in our world that are based on just material limitations. Having said that almost everything that works in tech, people have been trying to get it to work for decades before it actually works, right?
And so even like J GP T, there was a chat system called 
Eliza
 in the 19 fifties where they tried to basically get this to work. I mean, 
Eliza
 actually passes the turing test for a lot of people, a lot of people actually think Eliza is a real person as a, like a psychiatrist spot.
And so like people have been trying to get those things to work for a long time and or like the internet, look, the internet has a prehistory that goes back to, you know, the 19 fifties when a lot of the original work on pack, it's called packet switching was first done that didn't really take off until the eighties and nineties.
And so the other thing that I'm, I'm just like, really open to is where history else is very helpful. Is it just like, you know, if, if, if, if something is working, if there's like a breakthrough that's working today, it almost certainly in tech is not just like a brand new thing. It's probably something where there's a 40 year backstory.
Yeah, exactly. And there are probably generations of scientists and technologists and founders who tried and failed. There's a great, there's tons of examples in this. But one of my favorite ones is the 
French
 had optical telegraphs working like 40 years before elec electric telegraphs.
They had a system of glass tubes with flashing lights under the streets of 
Paris
 and they could flash messages across, across long distances and they had like mirrors and repeaters and all kinds of stuff. And it was just like an 18 forties or something, right? And so it's like, you know, all right then because right, the telegraph takes off 30 or 40 years later.
It's like, ok, like, you know, like, was that, you know, was that a breakthrough idea or was that just like the 40 year version of, oh tele television is a great example. There was a Scottish adventure of invented mechanical television starting in like the 18 nineties and he had a system where it would actually receive radio waves.
And then but it was a mechanical television. So there's no tube or like the like electronics or anything. It was entirely mechanical. It was spinning wooden blocks in, in a grid and the blocks had different colors and different sides and the blocks would spin to represent like red, green or blue.
And apparently that counts the time as like, if you squinted, you could actually see the picture coming through, but like it took another 30 years before you had like black and white television after that.
So, yeah, so there's this deep level there, there's all, all, not always, at least in our societies, the societies we've been lucky enough to live in. There's always some reservoir of fringe thinkers who are like way out there on the leading edge, probably decades ahead of their time, probably are never gonna be remembered. Probably actually originate the ideas.
Speaker 3
03:10:10
Then they kind of put the ideas in the air and then 10 years, 2030 years later, someone finds a way to execute it.
Speaker 1
03:10:19
That's right.
Speaker 2
03:10:21
That's right. Well, that's why I said, even neural networks, like, as I said, the, the, the, the first A I, I was actually shocked to learn this. I was reconstructing the history of A I last year.
And I didn't even, I, I thought the debate started in the forties. It actually started in the thirties about whether you could build computers based on the human brain. So in the 19, like, how much do they know about the brain in the 19 thirties?
Like, it couldn't have been that much, but they knew enough to, to, I immediately think like, wow, here's, here's what we could do. And so like, you know, like to me, like, those are the people I really to be that far ahead of your time and write.
It's just like, wow, amazing.
Speaker 3
03:10:52
How would you, you know, how does Moore's Law continue to work?
Speaker 2
03:10:58
So the, you never get to the end. No, you get to the end. Well, you, you, there's huge debate around this. You, you're, you're down to what's called two nanometer transistors. And so we're, we're down to the, the level of manufacturing that's taking place. The, the incredible leaps if, if you ever get a chance, there's this company I think called Applied Materials.
That's the 
Dutch
 company that makes the equipment to manufacture modern microchips. And it's these giant rooms, it's, it's just incredibly elaborate machinery and is doing all these things a lot of us with the photolithography. So it's literally shining patterns with light to manufacture, you know, things that end up being material.
And then it's these manufacturing processes, two nano two nanometers, you know, fractions of it, you know, tiny, tiny, tiny fractions of a human hair stuff as like the atomic level, like a lot of the barriers for progress. And Moore's Law literally is getting down to the level of individual atoms.
And the problem is like, we can't set by the atoms without blowing everything up. It unbelievable. And so yeah, it's like manufacturing the atomic level, you know, there's huge amounts of engineering going into trying to optimize that. There's a lot of work going into trying to make like ships three dimensional right. So you, so it's not taking up another dimension, what else?
There's, you know, a lot of work going into so called quantum computers, right, which is a totally different architecture design, which in theory is gonna be, you know, another one of these huge breakthroughs that just works totally differently. By the way, there's a lot of work going into biological computers.
So there's people working on light storage, like turns out you can store huge amounts of data in DNA because the human body encodes enormous amounts of information that is really cool cellular level. And so there's, there's people working on that. There's people working on biological computers, you know, growing computers and tanks.
Speaker 3
03:12:29
Wow. So cool.
Speaker 2
03:12:32
Yeah. Yeah. So it's, it's a, yeah, it's a, there's a whole field of information processing that all this stuff is based on which is like what Babbage and loveless. And these guys people came up with and it's sort of, yeah, it's, the pattern is like how to store and manipulate, analyze synthesize large amounts of information.
And it just turns out that the payoff from being able to do that is just gigantic. And so the amount of money that you would spend on R and D to be able to figure out better ways to do that is effectively unbounded.
And that, that continues.